URL: https://apnews.com/article/hollywood-ai-strike-wga-artificial-intelligence-39ab72582c3a15f77510c9c30a45ffc8

In Hollywood writers' battle against AI, humans win (for now) | AP News Menu World SECTIONS Iran war Russia-Ukraine war Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa TOP STORIES Iran offers to reopen Strait of Hormuz if US lifts its blockade and the war ends, officials say LIVE Live updates: Iran wants Strait of Hormuz reopening tied to US ending the war, officials say King Charles III arrives at the White House on a delicate mission to restore the UK-US relationship Newsletters The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. The Afternoon Wire Get caught up on what you may have missed throughout the day. See All Newsletters U.S. SECTIONS Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths TOP STORIES A fast-growing Georgia wildfire tops 31 square miles, with evacuations possible Haitians, Syrians aren't the only immigrants watching US Supreme Court arguments on temporary status Prosecutors say suspect in missing students' killings asked ChatGPT about disposing of a body Newsletters The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. See All Newsletters AP QUIZZES Test Your News I.Q. — take today’s quiz Politics SECTIONS 2026 Elections Election Results Election calendar White House Congress Supreme Court The latest AP-NORC polls Ground Game TOP STORIES Justice Department cites dinner shooting to press preservationists to drop Trump ballroom suit National Trust says it won't drop suit against Trump's $400M White House ballroom after DOJ request Virginia Supreme Court considers whether to block voter-approved US House map favoring Democrats Newsletters Ground Game Exclusive insights and key stories from the world of politics. See All Newsletters Sports SECTIONS NBA MLB NFL Golf Soccer NHL Auto Racing AP Top 25 College Football Poll TOP STORIES Jokic fined $50,000, Randle fined $35,000 for Nuggets-Wolves incident Baty first batter to have robot ump change bases-loaded walk to inning-ending called third strike Spurs star Wembanyama returns, says he's disappointed with the way his concussion was handled Newsletters AP Top 25 Poll Alerts Get email alerts for every college football Top 25 Poll release. The Sports Wire Your home base for in-depth reporting from the world of sports. See All Newsletters Entertainment SECTIONS Movies Fashion Television Celebrity Interviews Music Books TOP STORIES Summer Movie Guide 2026: Here’s what’s coming to theaters and streaming from May to August Trumps call for ABC to fire Jimmy Kimmel — again — after morbid joke about first lady Summer Movie Preview: Nolan, Spider-Man and 'Toy Story' light up the cinemas Newsletters AP Entertainment Wire Get AP's first personalized newsletter delivering you entertainment news twice a week. See All Newsletters Business SECTIONS Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology TOP STORIES Elon Musk and OpenAI CEO Sam Altman head to court in high-stakes showdown over AI US stocks inch to more records as oil prices rise ahead of a blockbuster week for Wall Street United Airlines CEO Scott Kirby says a tie-up with American Airlines would be good for travelers Science SECTIONS Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine TOP STORIES Trump administration fires independent board overseeing the National Science Foundation Arqueólogos en Pompeya usan IA para reconstruir rostro de una víctima de erupción del Vesubio Fact Check Oddities TOP STORIES How 2 men claimed an absurd record by driving an old 3-wheel car the length of Africa 1 million bees make for bumper-to-buzzer traffic on a Tennessee highway ramp Viral phenomenon in Argentina has young people identifying themselves as animals Fatou, the world's oldest gorilla living in captivity, celebrates her 69th birthday at Berlin Zoo Hot dogs and steaks and bacon, oh my! Meat raffles keep a beloved Midwest tradition alive Humanoid robots run a Chinese half-marathon alongside flesh-and-blood competitors Be Well SECTIONS Trending Better health At home Working well For the climate Eating well TOP STORIES Radio Taiso exercise tradition is a simple yet dynamic way to start the day Is TMI really such a bad thing? Here’s the case for oversharing Working Well: The simple act of taking deep breaths can reduce stress and anxiety Newsletters Photography SECTIONS 2025 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays TOP STORIES Robots have caught up to humans in the half marathon. This photo proves it How a remote camera captured the Artemis II launch and startled birds Working unseen to frame risk and ritual in a conflict-zone funeral Newsletters The World in Pictures Get The AP’s most compelling photographs sent directly to your inbox. See All Newsletters AP Investigations Climate SECTIONS Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus TOP STORIES Researchers say remote Lake Superior island's wolves are thriving as packs prey on moose Energy shock ripples through kitchens, forests and conservation in Africa and South Asia How you store produce can make it last longer Health TOP STORIES A good shower is a simple shower, no matter what influencers recommend US ice cream makers say they'll stop using artificial dyes by 2028 What to know about psychedelic retreats, a booming business with few safety guardrails FDA plans ultra-fast review of three psychedelic drugs following Trump directive Tick season seems to be off to a fast start, and some experts worry about future illnesses Dr. Oz announces a 50-state audit of Medicaid program oversight Tech SECTIONS Artificial Intelligence Social Media TOP STORIES One Tech Tip: Don't use rice for your device. Here's how to dry out your smartphone Dueling documentaries illuminate the promise and perils of artificial intelligence AI is giving bad advice to flatter its users, says new study on dangers of overly agreeable chatbots Lifestyle SECTIONS Food & Recipes Gardening Fashion Homes Travel Pets TOP STORIES Inside the world’s largest art heist when over $500M of paintings were stolen from a Boston museum Is TMI really such a bad thing? Here’s the case for oversharing Getting the most out of barrier-free tours for yourself or someone with a disability Religion TOP STORIES Pope prays with Archbishop of Canterbury Sarah Mullally in historic encounter, vows dialogue 'If my people': Here's why the Bible passage Trump read aloud is so potent and polarizing Trump and other top Republicans read passages in a marathon Bible event Newsletters World of Faith Comprehensive global coverage of how religion shapes our world. See All Newsletters Español SECTIONS Deportes Donald Trump TOP STORIES "Michael" recauda $97 millones en estreno, un récord para una película biográfica musical Acusado de ataque a cena de medios en Washington es tutor e ingeniero informático en California Un hombre armado trata de irrumpir en la cena de corresponsales de la Casa Blanca. Trump sale ileso Most watched videos Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account AP News Code of Conduct World Iran war Russia-Ukraine war Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa Middle East U.S. Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths Politics 2026 Elections Election Results Election calendar White House Congress Supreme Court The latest AP-NORC polls Ground Game Sports NBA MLB NFL Golf Soccer NHL Auto Racing AP Top 25 College Football Poll Entertainment Movies Fashion Television Celebrity Interviews Music Books Business Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology Science Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine Fact Check Oddities Be Well Trending Better health At home Working well For the climate Eating well Newsletters Photography 2025 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays AP Investigations Climate Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus Health Tech Artificial Intelligence Social Media Lifestyle Food & Recipes Gardening Fashion Homes Travel Pets Religion Español Deportes Donald Trump Most watched videos Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account AP News Code of Conduct MORE World Iran war Russia-Ukraine war Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa Middle East U.S. Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths Politics 2026 Elections Election Results Election calendar White House Congress Supreme Court The latest AP-NORC polls Ground Game Sports NBA MLB NFL Golf Soccer NHL Auto Racing AP Top 25 College Football Poll Entertainment Movies Fashion Television Celebrity Interviews Music Books Business Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology Science Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine Fact Check Oddities Be Well Trending Better health At home Working well For the climate Eating well Newsletters Photography 2025 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays AP Investigations Climate Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus Health Tech Artificial Intelligence Social Media Lifestyle Food & Recipes Gardening Fashion Homes Travel Pets Religion Español Deportes Donald Trump Most watched videos Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account AP News Code of Conduct Sign in Search Query Submit Search Show Search Menu Submit Search Menu World SECTIONS Iran war Russia-Ukraine war Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa TOP STORIES Iran offers to reopen Strait of Hormuz if US lifts its blockade and the war ends, officials say LIVE Live updates: Iran wants Strait of Hormuz reopening tied to US ending the war, officials say King Charles III arrives at the White House on a delicate mission to restore the UK-US relationship Newsletters The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. The Afternoon Wire Get caught up on what you may have missed throughout the day. See All Newsletters U.S. SECTIONS Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths TOP STORIES A fast-growing Georgia wildfire tops 31 square miles, with evacuations possible Haitians, Syrians aren't the only immigrants watching US Supreme Court arguments on temporary status Prosecutors say suspect in missing students' killings asked ChatGPT about disposing of a body Newsletters The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. See All Newsletters AP QUIZZES Test Your News I.Q. — take today’s quiz Politics SECTIONS 2026 Elections Election Results Election calendar White House Congress Supreme Court The latest AP-NORC polls Ground Game TOP STORIES Justice Department cites dinner shooting to press preservationists to drop Trump ballroom suit National Trust says it won't drop suit against Trump's $400M White House ballroom after DOJ request Virginia Supreme Court considers whether to block voter-approved US House map favoring Democrats Newsletters Ground Game Exclusive insights and key stories from the world of politics. See All Newsletters Sports SECTIONS NBA MLB NFL Golf Soccer NHL Auto Racing AP Top 25 College Football Poll TOP STORIES Jokic fined $50,000, Randle fined $35,000 for Nuggets-Wolves incident Baty first batter to have robot ump change bases-loaded walk to inning-ending called third strike Spurs star Wembanyama returns, says he's disappointed with the way his concussion was handled Newsletters AP Top 25 Poll Alerts Get email alerts for every college football Top 25 Poll release. The Sports Wire Your home base for in-depth reporting from the world of sports. See All Newsletters Entertainment SECTIONS Movies Fashion Television Celebrity Interviews Music Books TOP STORIES Summer Movie Guide 2026: Here’s what’s coming to theaters and streaming from May to August Trumps call for ABC to fire Jimmy Kimmel — again — after morbid joke about first lady Summer Movie Preview: Nolan, Spider-Man and 'Toy Story' light up the cinemas Newsletters AP Entertainment Wire Get AP's first personalized newsletter delivering you entertainment news twice a week. See All Newsletters Business SECTIONS Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology TOP STORIES Elon Musk and OpenAI CEO Sam Altman head to court in high-stakes showdown over AI US stocks inch to more records as oil prices rise ahead of a blockbuster week for Wall Street United Airlines CEO Scott Kirby says a tie-up with American Airlines would be good for travelers Science SECTIONS Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine TOP STORIES Trump administration fires independent board overseeing the National Science Foundation Arqueólogos en Pompeya usan IA para reconstruir rostro de una víctima de erupción del Vesubio Fact Check Oddities TOP STORIES How 2 men claimed an absurd record by driving an old 3-wheel car the length of Africa 1 million bees make for bumper-to-buzzer traffic on a Tennessee highway ramp Viral phenomenon in Argentina has young people identifying themselves as animals Fatou, the world's oldest gorilla living in captivity, celebrates her 69th birthday at Berlin Zoo Hot dogs and steaks and bacon, oh my! Meat raffles keep a beloved Midwest tradition alive Humanoid robots run a Chinese half-marathon alongside flesh-and-blood competitors Be Well SECTIONS Trending Better health At home Working well For the climate Eating well TOP STORIES Radio Taiso exercise tradition is a simple yet dynamic way to start the day Is TMI really such a bad thing? Here’s the case for oversharing Working Well: The simple act of taking deep breaths can reduce stress and anxiety Newsletters Photography SECTIONS 2025 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays TOP STORIES Robots have caught up to humans in the half marathon. This photo proves it How a remote camera captured the Artemis II launch and startled birds Working unseen to frame risk and ritual in a conflict-zone funeral Newsletters The World in Pictures Get The AP’s most compelling photographs sent directly to your inbox. See All Newsletters AP Investigations Climate SECTIONS Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus TOP STORIES Researchers say remote Lake Superior island's wolves are thriving as packs prey on moose Energy shock ripples through kitchens, forests and conservation in Africa and South Asia How you store produce can make it last longer Health TOP STORIES A good shower is a simple shower, no matter what influencers recommend US ice cream makers say they'll stop using artificial dyes by 2028 What to know about psychedelic retreats, a booming business with few safety guardrails FDA plans ultra-fast review of three psychedelic drugs following Trump directive Tick season seems to be off to a fast start, and some experts worry about future illnesses Dr. Oz announces a 50-state audit of Medicaid program oversight Tech SECTIONS Artificial Intelligence Social Media TOP STORIES One Tech Tip: Don't use rice for your device. Here's how to dry out your smartphone Dueling documentaries illuminate the promise and perils of artificial intelligence AI is giving bad advice to flatter its users, says new study on dangers of overly agreeable chatbots Lifestyle SECTIONS Food & Recipes Gardening Fashion Homes Travel Pets TOP STORIES Inside the world’s largest art heist when over $500M of paintings were stolen from a Boston museum Is TMI really such a bad thing? Here’s the case for oversharing Getting the most out of barrier-free tours for yourself or someone with a disability Religion TOP STORIES Pope prays with Archbishop of Canterbury Sarah Mullally in historic encounter, vows dialogue 'If my people': Here's why the Bible passage Trump read aloud is so potent and polarizing Trump and other top Republicans read passages in a marathon Bible event Newsletters World of Faith Comprehensive global coverage of how religion shapes our world. See All Newsletters Español SECTIONS Deportes Donald Trump TOP STORIES "Michael" recauda $97 millones en estreno, un récord para una película biográfica musical Acusado de ataque a cena de medios en Washington es tutor e ingeniero informático en California Un hombre armado trata de irrumpir en la cena de corresponsales de la Casa Blanca. Trump sale ileso Most watched videos Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account AP News Code of Conduct World Iran war Russia-Ukraine war Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa Middle East U.S. Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths Politics 2026 Elections Election Results Election calendar White House Congress Supreme Court The latest AP-NORC polls Ground Game Sports NBA MLB NFL Golf Soccer NHL Auto Racing AP Top 25 College Football Poll Entertainment Movies Fashion Television Celebrity Interviews Music Books Business Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology Science Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine Fact Check Oddities Be Well Trending Better health At home Working well For the climate Eating well Newsletters Photography 2025 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays AP Investigations Climate Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus Health Tech Artificial Intelligence Social Media Lifestyle Food & Recipes Gardening Fashion Homes Travel Pets Religion Español Deportes Donald Trump Most watched videos Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account AP News Code of Conduct MORE World Iran war Russia-Ukraine war Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa Middle East U.S. Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths Politics 2026 Elections Election Results Election calendar White House Congress Supreme Court The latest AP-NORC polls Ground Game Sports NBA MLB NFL Golf Soccer NHL Auto Racing AP Top 25 College Football Poll Entertainment Movies Fashion Television Celebrity Interviews Music Books Business Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology Science Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine Fact Check Oddities Be Well Trending Better health At home Working well For the climate Eating well Newsletters Photography 2025 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays AP Investigations Climate Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus Health Tech Artificial Intelligence Social Media Lifestyle Food & Recipes Gardening Fashion Homes Travel Pets Religion Español Deportes Donald Trump Most watched videos Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account AP News Code of Conduct Sign in Search Query Submit Search Show Search Menu Submit Search U.S. News In Hollywood writers’ battle against AI, humans win (for now) In Hollywood writers’ battle against AI, humans win (for now) 1 of 4 | Actor and SAG-AFTRA negotiator Frances Fisher, middle, raises her sign on a picket line outside Netflix studios on Tuesday, Sep. 26, 2023, in Los Angeles. (AP Photo/Damian Dovarganes) Read More 2 of 4 | Demonstrators picket outside the Paramount Pictures Studio in Los Angeles, Thursday, Sept. 21, 2023. Negotiations between striking screenwriters and Hollywood studios have resumed and will continue Thursday, the latest attempt to bring an end to pickets that have brought film and television productions to a halt. (AP Photo/Jae C. Hong) Read More 3 of 4 | SAG-AFTRA actors walk on a picket line outside Netflix studios on Tuesday, Sep. 26, 2023, in Los Angeles. (AP Photo/Damian Dovarganes) Read More 4 of 4 | File - Actor Joely Fisher, from left, SAG-AFTRA president Fran Drescher and Duncan Crabtree-Ireland, SAG-AFTRA national executive director and chief negotiator, take part in a rally by striking writers and actors outside Netflix studio in Los Angeles on July 14, 2023. Drescher took over as president of the Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists in September 2021 and has become a firebrand, as well as the face and voice of the top creative minds in Hollywood, over the past few months. (AP Photo/Chris Pizzello, File) Read More By JAKE COYLE Add AP News on Google Add AP News as your preferred source to see more of our stories on Google. Share Share Facebook Copy Link copied Email X LinkedIn Bluesky Flipboard Pinterest Reddit NEW YORK (AP) — After a 148-day strike, Hollywood screenwriters secured significant guardrails against the use of artificial intelligence in one of the first major labor battles over generative AI in the workplace. During the nearly five-month walkout, no issue resonated more than the use of AI in script writing. What was once a seemingly lesser demand of the Writers Guild of America became an existential rallying cry. The strike was also about streaming-era economics , writers room minimums and residuals — not exactly compelling picket-sign fodder. But the threat of AI vividly cast the writers’ plight as a human-versus-machine clash, with widespread implications for other industries facing a radically new kind of automation. In the coming weeks, WGA members will vote on whether to ratify a tentative agreement , which requires studios and production companies to disclose to writers if any material given to them has been generated by AI partially or in full. AI cannot be a credited writer. AI cannot write or rewrite “literary material.” AI-generated writing cannot be source material. Related stories Hollywood actors to resume negotiations with studios next week, as protracted writers strike ends Here’s when your favorite show will return now that the writers strike is ending “AI-generated material can’t be used to undermine a writer’s credit or separated rights,” the proposed contract reads. Many experts see the screenwriters’ deal as a forerunner for labor battles to come. “I hope it will be a model for a lot of other content-creation industries,” said Tom Davenport, a professor of information technology at Babson College and author of “ All-in on AI: How Smart Companies Win Big with Artificial Intelligence.” “It pretty much insures that if you’re going to use AI, it’s going to be humans working alongside AI. That, to me, has always been the best way to use any form of AI.” Read More The tentative agreement between the Writers Guild and the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers, which negotiates on behalf of the studios, doesn’t prohibit all uses of artificial intelligence. Both sides have acknowledged it can be a worthwhile tool in many aspects of filmmaking, including script writing. The deal states that writers can use AI if the company consents. But a company cannot require a writer to use AI software. Language over AI became a sticking point in the writers’ negotiations, which dragged on last week in part due to the challenges of bargaining on such a fast-evolving technology. When the writers strike began on May 2, it was just five months after OpenAI released ChatGPT , the AI chatbot that can write essays, have sophisticated conversations and craft stories from a handful of prompts. Studios said it was it too early to tackle AI in these negotiations and preferred to wait until 2026. Ultimately, they hashed out terms while noting that the outlook is certain to change. Under the draft contract, “the parties acknowledge that the legal landscape around the use of (generative AI) is uncertain and rapidly developing.” The companies and the guild agreed to meet at least twice a year during the contract’s three-year term. At the same time, there are no prohibitions on studios using scripts they own to train AI systems. The WGA left those issues up to the legal system to parse. A clause notes that writers retain the right to assert that their work has been exploited in training AI software. That’s been an increasingly prominent concern in the literary world. Last week, 17 authors, including John Grisham, Jonathan Franzen and George R.R. Martin, filed a lawsuit against OpenAI alleging the “systematic theft on a massive scale” of their copyrighted books. The terms the WGA achieved will surely be closely watched by others — particularly the striking members of the actors union, SAG-AFTRA. “This is the first step on a long process of negotiating and working through what generative AI means for the creative industry — not just writers but visual artists, actors, you name it,” says David Gunkel, a professor of media studies at Northern Illinois University and author of “Person, Thing, Robot.” Actors, on strike since July 14, are likewise seeking better compensation from streaming. But they are also demanding safeguards against AI, which can potentially use a star’s likeness without his or her permission or replace background actors entirely. Attempts to adopt AI “as a normal operating procedure” are “literally dehumanizing the workforce,” actor Bryan Cranston said recently on a picket line. “It’s not good for society. It’s not good for our environment. It’s not good for working-class families.” In other developments, SAG-AFTRA members voted overwhelmingly Monday in favor of a strike authorization against video game companies. The use of AI in gaming is a particularly acute anxiety for voice-over actors. Some skeptics doubt whether the writers made significant headway on AI. Media mogul Barry Diller, chairman of the digital media company IAC, believes not enough was done. “They spent months trying to craft words to protect writers from AI, and they ended up with a paragraph that protected nothing from no one,” Diller told CNBC. Robert D. Atkinson, president of the tech policy think tank Information Technology & Innovation Foundation, said limiting AI is unproductive. “If we ban the use of tools to make organizations more productive, we are consigning ourselves to stagnation,” Atkinson write on X, formerly known as Twitter. What most observers agree on, though, is that this was just the first of many AI labor disputes. Gunkel expects to see both writers and studios continue to experiment with AI. “We’re so early into this that no one is able to anticipate everything that might come up with generative AI in the creative industries,” Gunkel said. “We’re going to see the need again and again to revisit a lot of these questions.” ___ Follow AP Film Writer Jake Coyle at: http://twitter.com/jakecoyleAP JAKE COYLE Coyle has been a film critic and covered the movie industry for The Associated Press since 2013. He is based in New York City. twitter mailto Most read Iran offers to reopen Strait of Hormuz if US lifts its blockade and the war ends, officials say 5 MIN READ 511 Justice Department cites dinner shooting to press preservationists to drop Trump ballroom suit 5 MIN READ 425 DC gala shooting suspect aired grievances against Trump in writings to family 5 MIN READ 1223 Accused attacker at Washington media dinner is a tutor and computer engineer from California 4 MIN READ 409 live Live updates: Iran wants Strait of Hormuz reopening tied to US ending the war, officials say