URL: https://apnews.com/article/agi-artificial-general-intelligence-existential-risk-meta-openai-deepmind-science-ff5662a056d3cf3c5889a73e929e5a34

Tech companies want to build artificial general intelligence. But who decides when AGI is attained? | AP News Menu World SECTIONS Iran war Russia-Ukraine war Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa TOP STORIES Iran offers to reopen Strait of Hormuz if US lifts its blockade and the war ends, officials say LIVE Live updates: Iran wants Strait of Hormuz reopening tied to US ending the war, officials say King Charles III arrives at the White House on a delicate mission to restore the UK-US relationship Newsletters The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. The Afternoon Wire Get caught up on what you may have missed throughout the day. See All Newsletters U.S. SECTIONS Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths TOP STORIES A fast-growing Georgia wildfire tops 31 square miles, with evacuations possible Haitians, Syrians aren't the only immigrants watching US Supreme Court arguments on temporary status Prosecutors say suspect in missing students' killings asked ChatGPT about disposing of a body Newsletters The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. See All Newsletters AP QUIZZES Test Your News I.Q. — take today’s quiz Politics SECTIONS 2026 Elections Election Results Election calendar White House Congress Supreme Court The latest AP-NORC polls Ground Game TOP STORIES Justice Department cites dinner shooting to press preservationists to drop Trump ballroom suit National Trust says it won't drop suit against Trump's $400M White House ballroom after DOJ request Virginia Supreme Court considers whether to block voter-approved US House map favoring Democrats Newsletters Ground Game Exclusive insights and key stories from the world of politics. See All Newsletters Sports SECTIONS NBA MLB NFL Golf Soccer NHL Auto Racing AP Top 25 College Football Poll TOP STORIES Jokic fined $50,000, Randle fined $35,000 for Nuggets-Wolves incident Baty first batter to have robot ump change bases-loaded walk to inning-ending called third strike Spurs star Wembanyama returns, says he's disappointed with the way his concussion was handled Newsletters AP Top 25 Poll Alerts Get email alerts for every college football Top 25 Poll release. The Sports Wire Your home base for in-depth reporting from the world of sports. See All Newsletters Entertainment SECTIONS Movies Fashion Television Celebrity Interviews Music Books TOP STORIES Summer Movie Guide 2026: Here’s what’s coming to theaters and streaming from May to August Trumps call for ABC to fire Jimmy Kimmel — again — after morbid joke about first lady Summer Movie Preview: Nolan, Spider-Man and 'Toy Story' light up the cinemas Newsletters AP Entertainment Wire Get AP's first personalized newsletter delivering you entertainment news twice a week. See All Newsletters Business SECTIONS Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology TOP STORIES Elon Musk and OpenAI CEO Sam Altman head to court in high-stakes showdown over AI US stocks inch to more records as oil prices rise ahead of a blockbuster week for Wall Street United Airlines CEO Scott Kirby says a tie-up with American Airlines would be good for travelers Science SECTIONS Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine TOP STORIES Trump administration fires independent board overseeing the National Science Foundation Arqueólogos en Pompeya usan IA para reconstruir rostro de una víctima de erupción del Vesubio Fact Check Oddities TOP STORIES How 2 men claimed an absurd record by driving an old 3-wheel car the length of Africa 1 million bees make for bumper-to-buzzer traffic on a Tennessee highway ramp Viral phenomenon in Argentina has young people identifying themselves as animals Fatou, the world's oldest gorilla living in captivity, celebrates her 69th birthday at Berlin Zoo Hot dogs and steaks and bacon, oh my! Meat raffles keep a beloved Midwest tradition alive Humanoid robots run a Chinese half-marathon alongside flesh-and-blood competitors Be Well SECTIONS Trending Better health At home Working well For the climate Eating well TOP STORIES Radio Taiso exercise tradition is a simple yet dynamic way to start the day Is TMI really such a bad thing? Here’s the case for oversharing Working Well: The simple act of taking deep breaths can reduce stress and anxiety Newsletters Photography SECTIONS 2025 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays TOP STORIES Robots have caught up to humans in the half marathon. This photo proves it How a remote camera captured the Artemis II launch and startled birds Working unseen to frame risk and ritual in a conflict-zone funeral Newsletters The World in Pictures Get The AP’s most compelling photographs sent directly to your inbox. See All Newsletters AP Investigations Climate SECTIONS Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus TOP STORIES Researchers say remote Lake Superior island's wolves are thriving as packs prey on moose Energy shock ripples through kitchens, forests and conservation in Africa and South Asia How you store produce can make it last longer Health TOP STORIES A good shower is a simple shower, no matter what influencers recommend US ice cream makers say they'll stop using artificial dyes by 2028 What to know about psychedelic retreats, a booming business with few safety guardrails FDA plans ultra-fast review of three psychedelic drugs following Trump directive Tick season seems to be off to a fast start, and some experts worry about future illnesses Dr. Oz announces a 50-state audit of Medicaid program oversight Tech SECTIONS Artificial Intelligence Social Media TOP STORIES One Tech Tip: Don't use rice for your device. Here's how to dry out your smartphone Dueling documentaries illuminate the promise and perils of artificial intelligence AI is giving bad advice to flatter its users, says new study on dangers of overly agreeable chatbots Lifestyle SECTIONS Food & Recipes Gardening Fashion Homes Travel Pets TOP STORIES Inside the world’s largest art heist when over $500M of paintings were stolen from a Boston museum Is TMI really such a bad thing? Here’s the case for oversharing Getting the most out of barrier-free tours for yourself or someone with a disability Religion TOP STORIES Pope prays with Archbishop of Canterbury Sarah Mullally in historic encounter, vows dialogue 'If my people': Here's why the Bible passage Trump read aloud is so potent and polarizing Trump and other top Republicans read passages in a marathon Bible event Newsletters World of Faith Comprehensive global coverage of how religion shapes our world. See All Newsletters Español SECTIONS Deportes Donald Trump TOP STORIES "Michael" recauda $97 millones en estreno, un récord para una película biográfica musical Acusado de ataque a cena de medios en Washington es tutor e ingeniero informático en California Un hombre armado trata de irrumpir en la cena de corresponsales de la Casa Blanca. Trump sale ileso Most watched videos Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account AP News Code of Conduct World Iran war Russia-Ukraine war Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa Middle East U.S. Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths Politics 2026 Elections Election Results Election calendar White House Congress Supreme Court The latest AP-NORC polls Ground Game Sports NBA MLB NFL Golf Soccer NHL Auto Racing AP Top 25 College Football Poll Entertainment Movies Fashion Television Celebrity Interviews Music Books Business Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology Science Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine Fact Check Oddities Be Well Trending Better health At home Working well For the climate Eating well Newsletters Photography 2025 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays AP Investigations Climate Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus Health Tech Artificial Intelligence Social Media Lifestyle Food & Recipes Gardening Fashion Homes Travel Pets Religion Español Deportes Donald Trump Most watched videos Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account AP News Code of Conduct MORE World Iran war Russia-Ukraine war Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa Middle East U.S. Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths Politics 2026 Elections Election Results Election calendar White House Congress Supreme Court The latest AP-NORC polls Ground Game Sports NBA MLB NFL Golf Soccer NHL Auto Racing AP Top 25 College Football Poll Entertainment Movies Fashion Television Celebrity Interviews Music Books Business Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology Science Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine Fact Check Oddities Be Well Trending Better health At home Working well For the climate Eating well Newsletters Photography 2025 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays AP Investigations Climate Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus Health Tech Artificial Intelligence Social Media Lifestyle Food & Recipes Gardening Fashion Homes Travel Pets Religion Español Deportes Donald Trump Most watched videos Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account AP News Code of Conduct Sign in Search Query Submit Search Show Search Menu Submit Search Menu World SECTIONS Iran war Russia-Ukraine war Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa TOP STORIES Iran offers to reopen Strait of Hormuz if US lifts its blockade and the war ends, officials say LIVE Live updates: Iran wants Strait of Hormuz reopening tied to US ending the war, officials say King Charles III arrives at the White House on a delicate mission to restore the UK-US relationship Newsletters The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. The Afternoon Wire Get caught up on what you may have missed throughout the day. See All Newsletters U.S. SECTIONS Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths TOP STORIES A fast-growing Georgia wildfire tops 31 square miles, with evacuations possible Haitians, Syrians aren't the only immigrants watching US Supreme Court arguments on temporary status Prosecutors say suspect in missing students' killings asked ChatGPT about disposing of a body Newsletters The Morning Wire Our flagship newsletter breaks down the biggest headlines of the day. See All Newsletters AP QUIZZES Test Your News I.Q. — take today’s quiz Politics SECTIONS 2026 Elections Election Results Election calendar White House Congress Supreme Court The latest AP-NORC polls Ground Game TOP STORIES Justice Department cites dinner shooting to press preservationists to drop Trump ballroom suit National Trust says it won't drop suit against Trump's $400M White House ballroom after DOJ request Virginia Supreme Court considers whether to block voter-approved US House map favoring Democrats Newsletters Ground Game Exclusive insights and key stories from the world of politics. See All Newsletters Sports SECTIONS NBA MLB NFL Golf Soccer NHL Auto Racing AP Top 25 College Football Poll TOP STORIES Jokic fined $50,000, Randle fined $35,000 for Nuggets-Wolves incident Baty first batter to have robot ump change bases-loaded walk to inning-ending called third strike Spurs star Wembanyama returns, says he's disappointed with the way his concussion was handled Newsletters AP Top 25 Poll Alerts Get email alerts for every college football Top 25 Poll release. The Sports Wire Your home base for in-depth reporting from the world of sports. See All Newsletters Entertainment SECTIONS Movies Fashion Television Celebrity Interviews Music Books TOP STORIES Summer Movie Guide 2026: Here’s what’s coming to theaters and streaming from May to August Trumps call for ABC to fire Jimmy Kimmel — again — after morbid joke about first lady Summer Movie Preview: Nolan, Spider-Man and 'Toy Story' light up the cinemas Newsletters AP Entertainment Wire Get AP's first personalized newsletter delivering you entertainment news twice a week. See All Newsletters Business SECTIONS Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology TOP STORIES Elon Musk and OpenAI CEO Sam Altman head to court in high-stakes showdown over AI US stocks inch to more records as oil prices rise ahead of a blockbuster week for Wall Street United Airlines CEO Scott Kirby says a tie-up with American Airlines would be good for travelers Science SECTIONS Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine TOP STORIES Trump administration fires independent board overseeing the National Science Foundation Arqueólogos en Pompeya usan IA para reconstruir rostro de una víctima de erupción del Vesubio Fact Check Oddities TOP STORIES How 2 men claimed an absurd record by driving an old 3-wheel car the length of Africa 1 million bees make for bumper-to-buzzer traffic on a Tennessee highway ramp Viral phenomenon in Argentina has young people identifying themselves as animals Fatou, the world's oldest gorilla living in captivity, celebrates her 69th birthday at Berlin Zoo Hot dogs and steaks and bacon, oh my! Meat raffles keep a beloved Midwest tradition alive Humanoid robots run a Chinese half-marathon alongside flesh-and-blood competitors Be Well SECTIONS Trending Better health At home Working well For the climate Eating well TOP STORIES Radio Taiso exercise tradition is a simple yet dynamic way to start the day Is TMI really such a bad thing? Here’s the case for oversharing Working Well: The simple act of taking deep breaths can reduce stress and anxiety Newsletters Photography SECTIONS 2025 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays TOP STORIES Robots have caught up to humans in the half marathon. This photo proves it How a remote camera captured the Artemis II launch and startled birds Working unseen to frame risk and ritual in a conflict-zone funeral Newsletters The World in Pictures Get The AP’s most compelling photographs sent directly to your inbox. See All Newsletters AP Investigations Climate SECTIONS Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus TOP STORIES Researchers say remote Lake Superior island's wolves are thriving as packs prey on moose Energy shock ripples through kitchens, forests and conservation in Africa and South Asia How you store produce can make it last longer Health TOP STORIES A good shower is a simple shower, no matter what influencers recommend US ice cream makers say they'll stop using artificial dyes by 2028 What to know about psychedelic retreats, a booming business with few safety guardrails FDA plans ultra-fast review of three psychedelic drugs following Trump directive Tick season seems to be off to a fast start, and some experts worry about future illnesses Dr. Oz announces a 50-state audit of Medicaid program oversight Tech SECTIONS Artificial Intelligence Social Media TOP STORIES One Tech Tip: Don't use rice for your device. Here's how to dry out your smartphone Dueling documentaries illuminate the promise and perils of artificial intelligence AI is giving bad advice to flatter its users, says new study on dangers of overly agreeable chatbots Lifestyle SECTIONS Food & Recipes Gardening Fashion Homes Travel Pets TOP STORIES Inside the world’s largest art heist when over $500M of paintings were stolen from a Boston museum Is TMI really such a bad thing? Here’s the case for oversharing Getting the most out of barrier-free tours for yourself or someone with a disability Religion TOP STORIES Pope prays with Archbishop of Canterbury Sarah Mullally in historic encounter, vows dialogue 'If my people': Here's why the Bible passage Trump read aloud is so potent and polarizing Trump and other top Republicans read passages in a marathon Bible event Newsletters World of Faith Comprehensive global coverage of how religion shapes our world. See All Newsletters Español SECTIONS Deportes Donald Trump TOP STORIES "Michael" recauda $97 millones en estreno, un récord para una película biográfica musical Acusado de ataque a cena de medios en Washington es tutor e ingeniero informático en California Un hombre armado trata de irrumpir en la cena de corresponsales de la Casa Blanca. Trump sale ileso Most watched videos Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account AP News Code of Conduct World Iran war Russia-Ukraine war Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa Middle East U.S. Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths Politics 2026 Elections Election Results Election calendar White House Congress Supreme Court The latest AP-NORC polls Ground Game Sports NBA MLB NFL Golf Soccer NHL Auto Racing AP Top 25 College Football Poll Entertainment Movies Fashion Television Celebrity Interviews Music Books Business Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology Science Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine Fact Check Oddities Be Well Trending Better health At home Working well For the climate Eating well Newsletters Photography 2025 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays AP Investigations Climate Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus Health Tech Artificial Intelligence Social Media Lifestyle Food & Recipes Gardening Fashion Homes Travel Pets Religion Español Deportes Donald Trump Most watched videos Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account AP News Code of Conduct MORE World Iran war Russia-Ukraine war Español China Asia Pacific Latin America Europe Africa Middle East U.S. Immigration Weather Education Transportation Abortion LGBTQ+ Notable Deaths Politics 2026 Elections Election Results Election calendar White House Congress Supreme Court The latest AP-NORC polls Ground Game Sports NBA MLB NFL Golf Soccer NHL Auto Racing AP Top 25 College Football Poll Entertainment Movies Fashion Television Celebrity Interviews Music Books Business Tariffs Inflation Financial Markets Financial Wellness Technology Science Space Animals The Ancient World Climate Medicine Fact Check Oddities Be Well Trending Better health At home Working well For the climate Eating well Newsletters Photography 2025 YEAR END PHOTOS Photo Essays AP Investigations Climate Indigenous peoples and climate Climate Questions Climate Migration India Focus Health Tech Artificial Intelligence Social Media Lifestyle Food & Recipes Gardening Fashion Homes Travel Pets Religion Español Deportes Donald Trump Most watched videos Standards Quizzes Press Releases My Account AP News Code of Conduct Sign in Search Query Submit Search Show Search Menu Submit Search Business Tech companies want to build artificial general intelligence. But who decides when AGI is attained? Tech companies want to build artificial general intelligence. But who decides when AGI is attained? 1 of 3 | Dr. Pei Wang teaches a artificial general intelligence class at Temple University in Philadelphia, Thursday, Feb. 1, 2024. Mainstream AI research “turned away from the original vision of artificial intelligence, which at the beginning was pretty ambitious,” said Wang. (AP Photo/Matt Rourke) Read More 2 of 3 | Dr. Pei Wang teaches a artificial general intelligence class at Temple University in Philadelphia, Thursday, Feb. 1, 2024. Mainstream AI research “turned away from the original vision of artificial intelligence, which at the beginning was pretty ambitious,” said Wang. (AP Photo/Matt Rourke) Read More 3 of 3 | FILE - Pioneering AI scientist Geoffrey Hinton, poses at Google’s Mountain View, Calif, headquarters on March 25, 2015. There’s a race underway to build artificial general intelligence, nicknamed AGI, a futuristic vision of machines that are broadly as smart as humans. Hinton prefers a different term for AGI — superintelligence — “for AGIs that are better than humans.” (AP Photo/Noah Berger, File) Read More By MATT O’BRIEN Add AP News on Google Add AP News as your preferred source to see more of our stories on Google. Share Share Facebook Copy Link copied Email X LinkedIn Bluesky Flipboard Pinterest Reddit There’s a race underway to build artificial general intelligence, a futuristic vision of machines that are as broadly smart as humans or at least can do many things as well as people can. Achieving such a concept — commonly referred to as AGI — is the driving mission of ChatGPT-maker OpenAI and a priority for the elite research wings of tech giants Amazon, Google, Meta and Microsoft. It’s also a cause for concern for world governments . Leading AI scientists published research Thursday in the journal Science warning that unchecked AI agents with “long-term planning” skills could pose an existential risk to humanity. But what exactly is AGI and how will we know when it’s been attained? Once on the fringe of computer science, it’s now a buzzword that’s being constantly redefined by those trying to make it happen. What is AGI? Not to be confused with the similar-sounding generative AI — which describes the AI systems behind the crop of tools that “generate” new documents, images and sounds — artificial general intelligence is a more nebulous idea. It’s not a technical term but “a serious, though ill-defined, concept,” said Geoffrey Hinton, a pioneering AI scientist who’s been dubbed a “Godfather of AI.” “I don’t think there is agreement on what the term means,” Hinton said by email this week. “I use it to mean AI that is at least as good as humans at nearly all of the cognitive things that humans do.” Hinton prefers a different term — superintelligence — “for AGIs that are better than humans.” Read More A small group of early proponents of the term AGI were looking to evoke how mid-20th century computer scientists envisioned an intelligent machine. That was before AI research branched into subfields that advanced specialized and commercially viable versions of the technology — from face recognition to speech-recognizing voice assistants like Siri and Alexa. Mainstream AI research “turned away from the original vision of artificial intelligence, which at the beginning was pretty ambitious,” said Pei Wang, a professor who teaches an AGI course at Temple University and helped organize the first AGI conference in 2008. Putting the ‘G’ in AGI was a signal to those who “still want to do the big thing. We don’t want to build tools. We want to build a thinking machine,” Wang said. Are we at AGI yet? Without a clear definition, it’s hard to know when a company or group of researchers will have achieved artificial general intelligence — or if they already have. “Twenty years ago, I think people would have happily agreed that systems with the ability of GPT-4 or (Google’s) Gemini had achieved general intelligence comparable to that of humans,” Hinton said. “Being able to answer more or less any question in a sensible way would have passed the test. But now that AI can do that, people want to change the test.” Improvements in “autoregressive” AI techniques that predict the most plausible next word in a sequence, combined with massive computing power to train those systems on troves of data, have led to impressive chatbots, but they’re still not quite the AGI that many people had in mind. Getting to AGI requires technology that can perform just as well as humans in a wide variety of tasks, including reasoning, planning and the ability to learn from experiences. Some researchers would like to find consensus on how to measure it. It’s one of the topics of an upcoming AGI workshop next month in Vienna, Austria — the first at a major AI research conference. “This really needs a community’s effort and attention so that mutually we can agree on some sort of classifications of AGI,” said workshop organizer Jiaxuan You, an assistant professor at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. One idea is to segment it into levels in the same way that carmakers try to benchmark the path between cruise control and fully self-driving vehicles. Others plan to figure it out on their own. San Francisco company OpenAI has given its nonprofit board of directors — whose members include a former U.S. Treasury secretary — the responsibility of deciding when its AI systems have reached the point at which they “outperform humans at most economically valuable work.” “The board determines when we’ve attained AGI,” says OpenAI’s own explanation of its governance structure. Such an achievement would cut off the company’s biggest partner, Microsoft, from the rights to commercialize such a system, since the terms of their agreements “only apply to pre-AGI technology.” Is AGI dangerous? Hinton made global headlines last year when he quit Google and sounded a warning about AI’s existential dangers. A new Science study published Thursday could reinforce those concerns. Its lead author is Michael Cohen, a University of California, Berkeley, researcher who studies the “expected behavior of generally intelligent artificial agents,” particularly those competent enough to “present a real threat to us by out planning us.” Cohen made clear in an interview Thursday that such long-term AI planning agents don’t yet exist. But “they have the potential” to get more advanced as tech companies seek to combine today’s chatbot technology with more deliberate planning skills using a technique known as reinforcement learning. “Giving an advanced AI system the objective to maximize its reward and, at some point, withholding reward from it, strongly incentivizes the AI system to take humans out of the loop, if it has the opportunity,” according to the paper whose co-authors include prominent AI scientists Yoshua Bengio and Stuart Russell and law professor and former OpenAI adviser Gillian Hadfield. “I hope we’ve made the case that people in government (need) to start thinking seriously about exactly what regulations we need to address this problem,” Cohen said. For now, “governments only know what these companies decide to tell them.” Too legit to quit AGI? With so much money riding on the promise of AI advances, it’s no surprise that AGI is also becoming a corporate buzzword that sometimes attracts a quasi-religious fervor. It’s divided some of the tech world between those who argue it should be developed slowly and carefully and others — including venture capitalists and rapper MC Hammer — who’ve declared themselves part of an “accelerationist” camp. The London-based startup DeepMind, founded in 2010 and now part of Google, was one of the first companies to explicitly set out to develop AGI. OpenAI did the same in 2015 with a safety-focused pledge. But now it might seem that everyone else is jumping on the bandwagon. Google co-founder Sergey Brin was recently seen hanging out at a California venue called the AGI House. And less than three years after changing its name from Facebook to focus on virtual worlds, Meta Platforms in January revealed that AGI was also on the top of its agenda. Meta CEO Mark Zuckerberg said his company’s long-term goal was “building full general intelligence” that would require advances in reasoning, planning, coding and other cognitive abilities. While Zuckerberg’s company has long had researchers focused on those subjects , his attention marked a change in tone. At Amazon, one sign of the new messaging was when the head scientist for the voice assistant Alexa switched job titles to become head scientist for AGI. While not as tangible to Wall Street as generative AI, broadcasting AGI ambitions may help recruit AI talent who have a choice in where they want to work. In deciding between an “old-school AI institute” or one whose “goal is to build AGI” and has sufficient resources to do so, many would choose the latter, said You, the University of Illinois researcher. MATT O’BRIEN O’Brien covers the business of technology and artificial intelligence for The Associated Press. mailto Most read Iran offers to reopen Strait of Hormuz if US lifts its blockade and the war ends, officials say 5 MIN READ 515 Justice Department cites dinner shooting to press preservationists to drop Trump ballroom suit 5 MIN READ 426 DC gala shooting suspect aired grievances against Trump in writings to family 5 MIN READ 1223 Accused attacker at Washington media dinner is a tutor and computer engineer from California 4 MIN READ 409 live Live updates: Iran wants Strait of Hormuz reopening tied to US ending the war, officials say