URL: https://datasciencelearningcenter.substack.com/p/what-is-mojo-programming-language

What is Mojo Programming Language? - by Michael Spencer Machine Economy Press Subscribe Sign in Programming What is Mojo Programming Language? Mojo language marries Python and MLIR for AI development Michael Spencer May 04, 2023 ∙ Paid 4 1 Share Photo by Kevin Ku on Unsplash Is this the A.I. programming language of the future? Hey Guys, Read Datascience Learning Center in the Substack app Available for iOS and Android Get the app If Rust went from a side project to being the world’s most-loved programming language, what can Mojo become? I have a big feeling about this. AI infrastructure company, Modular AI , recently unveiled Mojo , a new programming language that combines the syntax of Python along with the portability and speed of C, making it ideal for both research and production. Subscribe This language is designed specifically for AI applications and is said to bridge the gap between research and production by combining the best of Python syntax with systems programming and metaprogramming. According to their keynote, Mojo is about 35,000x faster than Python, which is simply incredible. It offers unparalleled programmability of AI hardware and extensibility of AI models, making it a game-changer in the field. Share Datascience Learning Center One of the most exciting features of Mojo is that it allows you to write portable code that’s faster than C and seamlessly inter-op with the Python ecosystem. You can write Python or scale all the way down to the metal with no need for C++ or CUDA. Mojo has a number of other impressive features, such as a unified inference engine, progressive type system, zero-cost abstractions, and an ownership and borrow checker (like Rust). Although the language is still in development and not publicly available yet, the potential it holds for AI applications is truly exciting. Keen to see how it gets picked up by the community. Here’s the website to learn more: Read about Mojo There are a lot of good YouTubes already about it. For decades, coders wrote critical systems in C and C++. Now they turn to Rust. But if Python is so popular what will Mojo do to it? Subscribe Sign up to Modular’s Newsletter here. Let’s get a lot more into this! Continue reading this post for free, courtesy of Michael Spencer. Claim my free post Or purchase a paid subscription. © 2026 Michael Spencer · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice Start your Substack Get the app Substack is the home for great culture This site requires JavaScript to run correctly. Please turn on JavaScript or unblock scripts