URL: https://doi.org/10.1017%2F9781009258227

Artificial Intelligence | Cambridge Aspire website Skip to main content Accessibility help t d Internet Explorer 11 is being discontinued by Microsoft in August 2021. If you have difficulties viewing the site on Internet Explorer 11 we recommend using a different browser such as Microsoft Edge, Google Chrome, Apple Safari or Mozilla Firefox. X Search Institution Login Search Menu links Browse Products Explore textbooks About our textbooks View all textbooks View new textbooks View open access textbooks Search textbooks Textbook resources Topical Textbooks Explore other Higher Education products Multimedia Fluid Mechanics Cambridge Shakespeare Cambridge Companions LACTOR Sourcebooks Explore other digital course materials APA PsycLearn® Principles of Economics Principles of Finance Cambridge Core - journals and books Subjects Anthropology Archaeology Area Studies Art Business and Management Chemistry Classical Studies Computer Science Drama, Theatre, Performance Studies Earth and Environmental Sciences Economics Education Engineering Film, Media, Mass Communication General General Science Geography Health and Medicine History Language and Linguistics Law Life Sciences Literature Mathematics Music Philosophy Physics and Astronomy Politics and International Relations Psychiatry Psychology Religion Sociology Statistics and Probability Services Instructors Course materials Textbooks APA PsycLearn Request an exam copy Request a trial Access options Other related products Information and policies Our Higher Education mission Diversity and inclusion Affordability Accessibility Sustainability Editions management MyBook discount offer Help and FAQs Contact your sales rep Contact our support team Engagement and learning analytics LMS integration centre Instructor guides and FAQs Connect with us Email alerts Events Blog Join our panel Give us feedback Students Course materials About our textbooks How to access Other related products Information and policies Our Higher Education mission Diversity and inclusion Affordability Accessibility Sustainability MyBook discount offer Help and FAQs Contact our support team Student guides and FAQs How to read our digital textbooks Connect with us Email alerts Events Blog Join our student panel Give us feedback Librarians Course materials Textbooks for Librarians Request a trial Access options Information and policies Our Higher Education mission Diversity and inclusion Affordability Accessibility Sustainability Editions management MyBook discount offer Help and FAQs Contact your sales rep Contact our support team MARC records and KBART COUNTER usage reporting Engagement and learning analytics LMS integration centre Librarian user guides and FAQs Connect with us Email alerts Events Blog Join our panel Give us feedback Authors Course materials About Cambridge Textbooks Information and policies Our Higher Education mission Publish with us Author services Diversity and inclusion Affordability Accessibility Sustainability Help and FAQs Contact our support team Contact our editorial team Author guides and FAQs Connect with us Email alerts Events Blog Give us feedback Home > Subjects > Artificial Intelligence Artificial Intelligence Foundations of Computational Agents Search within full text 3rd edition (current edition) < Previous edition Newer edition > Buy the print book Request instructor examination copy Curated content Textbook The Science of Deep Learning Iddo Drori Online publication date: 23 September 2022 Hardback publication date: Textbook Adversarial Learning and Secure AI David J. Miller Zhen Xiang George Kesidis Online publication date: 07 September 2023 Hardback publication date: Textbook Undergraduate Library eCollections Award winner Authors David L. Poole , University of British Columbia, Vancouver , Alan K. Mackworth , University of British Columbia, Vancouver Published 2023 Description Fully revised and updated, this third edition includes three new chapters on neural networks and deep learning including generative AI, causality, and the social, ethical and regulatory impacts of artificial intelligence. All parts have been updated with the methods that have been proven to work. The book's novel agent design space provides a coherent framework for learning, reasoning and decision making. Numerous realistic applications and examples facilitate student understanding. Every concept or algorithm is presented in pseudocode and open source… Read more > New in this edition New chapters on deep learning, causality, and social impact Social impact sections in each chapter give students context on ethical and societal impacts of AI More content on modern machine learning, giving students a greater understanding of one of the key tools in modern AI Closer integration with AIPython code/design space, giving students more scope for experimentation and developing coding skills Resources available Unlock the full potential of this textbook with additional resources. There are free resources and Instructor restricted resources available for this textbook. Explore resources Get access Share Export citation Add to bookmarks Download flyer Add bookmark Export citation Share Resources available Unlock the full potential of this textbook with additional resources. There are free resources and Instructor restricted resources available for this textbook. Explore resources Overview Contents Resources Authors Reviews Metrics Overview Key features Introduces concepts at the right level of detail, using straightforward language and minimum mathematics Examines the social and ethical impacts of AI, connecting techniques to real-world benefits and harms Explains state-of-the-art algorithms and examples underlying the theory, demonstrating how concepts are applied Provides two complementary software systems – AIPython and AILog - for experimentation and extension Pedagogical features include examples, end-of-chapter reviews, further reading lists, and exercises Awards 2026 Patrick Henry Winston Outstanding Educator Award, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence/Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence About the book DOI https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009258227 Subjects Artificial Intelligence and Natural Language Processing, Computer Science Editions 2nd Edition 3rd Edition (Current edition) Format: Hardback Publication date: 13 July 2023 ISBN: 9781009258197 Dimensions (mm): 254 x 177 mm Weight: 1.95kg Page extent: 898 pages Availability: Available Format: Digital Publication date: 14 August 2023 ISBN: 9781009258227 Access options Review the options below to login to check your access. Personal login Log in with your Cambridge Aspire website account to check access. Log in Purchase options There are no purchase options available for this title. Have an access code? To redeem an access code, please log in with your personal login. Log in If you believe you should have access to this content, please contact your institutional librarian or consult our FAQ page for further information about accessing our content. Also available to purchase from these educational ebook suppliers Digital purchase options Authors David L. Poole, University of British Columbia, Vancouver David L. Poole is Professor of Computer Science at the University of British Columbia. He is a former chair of the Association for Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, the winner of the Canadian AI Association (CAIAC) Lifetime Achievement Award, and is a Fellow of AAAI and CAIAC. Alan K. Mackworth, University of British Columbia, Vancouver Alan K. Mackworth is a Professor Emeritus of Computer Science at the University of British Columbia, where he co-founded the pioneering UBC Cognitive Systems Program. He served as President of CAIAC, IJCAII, and AAAI, and now acts as a consultant, writer and lecturer. He is a Fellow of AAAI, CAIAC, CIFAR, AGE-WELL and the Royal Society of Canada. Curated content Textbook The Science of Deep Learning Iddo Drori Online publication date: 23 September 2022 Hardback publication date: Textbook Adversarial Learning and Secure AI David J. Miller Zhen Xiang George Kesidis Online publication date: 07 September 2023 Hardback publication date: