URL: https://doi.org/10.1017%2FS0140525X00005756

Minds, brains, and programs | Behavioral and Brain Sciences | Cambridge Core Skip to main content Accessibility help Login Alert Cancel Log in × × Logo for Cambridge Core from Cambridge University Press. Click to return to homepage. Search Logo for Cambridge Core from Cambridge University Press. Click to return to homepage. Institution Login Search Menu links Browse Subjects Subjects (A-D) Anthropology Archaeology Area Studies Art Chemistry Classical Studies Computer Science Drama, Theatre, Performance Studies Subjects (E-K) Earth and Environmental Science Economics Education Engineering English Language Teaching – Resources for Teachers Film, Media, Mass Communication General Science Geography History Subjects (L-O) Language and Linguistics Law Life Sciences Literature Management Materials Science Mathematics Medicine Music Nutrition Subjects (P-Z) Philosophy Physics and Astronomy Politics and International Relations Psychiatry Psychology Religion Social Science Research Methods Sociology Statistics and Probability Open access All open access publishing Open access Open access journals Research open journals Journals containing open access Open access articles Open access books Open access Elements Journals Explore All journal subjects Search journals Open access Open access journals Research open journals Journals containing open access Open access articles Collections Cambridge Forum Cambridge Law Reports Collection Cambridge Prisms Research Directions Books Explore Books Open access books New books Flip it Open Collections Cambridge Companions Cambridge Editions Cambridge Histories Cambridge Library Collection Cambridge Shakespeare Cambridge Handbooks Collections (cont.) Dispute Settlement Reports Online Flip it Open Hemingway Letters Shakespeare Survey Stahl Online The Correspondence of Isaac Newton Elements Explore About Elements Elements series Open access Elements New Elements Subjects (A-E) Anthropology Archaeology Classical Studies Computer Science Drama, Theatre, Performance Studies Earth and Environmental Sciences Economics Education Engineering Subjects (F-O) Film, Media, Mass Communication History Language and Linguistics Law Life Sciences Literature Management Mathematics Medicine Music Subjects (P-Z) Philosophy Physics and Astronomy Politics and International Relations Psychology Religion Sociology Statistics and Probability Textbooks Explore Cambridge Higher Education Title list New titles Collections Book collections Cambridge Companions Cambridge Editions Cambridge Histories Cambridge Library Collection Cambridge Shakespeare Cambridge Handbooks Book collections (cont.) Dispute Settlement Reports Online Flip it Open Hemingway Letters Shakespeare Survey Stahl Online The Correspondence of Isaac Newton Journal collections Cambridge Forum Cambridge Law Reports Collection Cambridge Materials Cambridge Prisms Series All series Partners Partners Agenda Publishing Anthem Press ARC Humanities Press Boydell & Brewer Bristol University Press Central European University Press Edinburgh University Press Emirates Center for Strategic Studies and Research Facet Publishing Foundation Books Partners (cont.) Gerlach Press Intersentia ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute Jagiellonian University Press Manchester University Press Multilingual Matters Oxbow Books Royal Economic Society The University of Adelaide Press Unisa Press Partners (cont.) Wits University Press Services About About Cambridge Core About Accessibility statement CrossMark policy Ethical Standards Environment and sustainability Environment and sustainability Reducing print Journals moving to online only Guides User guides User Guides and Videos Support Videos Training Help Cambridge Core help Contact us Technical support Agents Services for agents Services for agents Journals for agents Books for agents Price list Authors Journals Journal authors Journal publishing statistics Corresponding author Seeking permission to use copyrighted material Publishing supplementary material Preparing accessible materials Journal production - FAQs Journals (cont.) Author affiliations Co-reviewing policy Anonymising your manuscript Publishing open access Convert your article to Gold Open Access Publishing Open Access - webinars Journals (cont.) Preparing and submitting your paper Publication journey Publishing agreement FAQs for journal authors Author Information Form FAQs Promoting your published paper Measuring impact Journals artwork guide Using ORCID Books Books Publishing an open access book Marketing your book Author guides for Cambridge Elements Corporates Corporates Commercial reprints Advertising Sponsorship Book special sales Contact us Editors Information Journal development Peer review for editors Open access for editors Policies and guidelines Resources The editor's role Open research for editors Engagement and promotion for editors Librarians Information Open Access for Librarians Transformative agreements Transformative Agreements - FAQs Evidence based acquisition Cambridge libraries of the world podcast Purchasing models Journals Publishing Updates Products Cambridge frontlist Cambridge journals digital archive Hot topics Other digital products Perpetual access products Price list Developing country programme New content Tools Eligibility checker Transformative agreements KBART MARC records Using MARCEdit for MARC records Inbound OpenURL specifications COUNTER usage reporting Resources Catalogues and resources Making the most of your EBA Posters Leaflets and brochures Additional resources Find my sales contact Training Read and publish resources Peer review Peer review How to peer review journal articles How to peer review book proposals How to peer review Registered Reports Peer review FAQs Ethics in peer review Online peer review systems A guide to Publons Publishing ethics Journals Publishing ethics guidelines for journals Core editorial policies for journals Authorship and contributorship for journals Affiliations for journals Research ethics for journals Competing interests and funding for journals Journals (cont.) Data and supporting evidence for journals Misconduct for journals Corrections, retractions and removals for journals Versions and adaptations for journals Libel, defamation and freedom of expression Business ethics journals Books Publishing ethics guidelines for books Core editorial policies for books Authorship and contributorship for books Affiliations for books Research ethics for books Competing interests and funding for books Books (cont.) Data and supporting evidence for books Misconduct for books Corrections, retractions and removals for books Versions and adaptations for books Libel, defamation and freedom of expression Business ethics books Publishing partners Publishing partners Publishing partnerships Book publishing partners eBook publishing partnerships Journal publishing partnerships Publishing partners (cont.) Journals publishing Customer support Membership Services Our Team Open research Open access policies Open access policies Open research Open access policies Cambridge University Press and Plan S Text and data mining Preprint policy Social sharing Journals Open access journals Gold Open Access journals Transformative journals Green Open Access policy for journals Transparent pricing policy for journals Books and Elements Open access books Gold open access books Green Open Access policy for books Open access Elements Open access publishing About open access Open research Open Access Week What is open access? Open access glossary Open access myths Hybrid Open Access FAQs Eligibility checker Open access resources Open access resources Benefits of open access Creative commons licences Funder policies and mandates Article type definitions Convert your article to Gold Open Access Open research initiatives Research transparency Transparency and openness Open Practice Badges OA organisations, initiatives & directories Registered Reports Annotation for Transparent Inquiry (ATI) Journal flips Open access journal flips OA Journal Flip FAQs Flip it Open Flip it Open Flip it Open FAQs Open access funding Open access funding Funding open access publication Cambridge Open Equity Initiative Completing a RightsLink (open access) transaction Cambridge Open Engage Cambridge Open Engage Cambridge Open Engage Partner With Us Branded Hubs Event Workspaces Partner Resources APSA Preprints APSA Preprints FAQs Hostname: page-component-77c78cf97d-9dm9z Total loading time: 0 Render date: 2026-04-27T09:30:25.528Z Has data issue: false hasContentIssue false Home > Journals > Behavioral and Brain Sciences > Volume 3 Issue 3 > Minds, brains, and programs English Français Behavioral and Brain Sciences Article contents Abstract References Minds, brains, and programs Published online by Cambridge University Press: 04 February 2010 John R. Searle Show author details John R. Searle Affiliation: Department of Philosophy, University of California, Berkeley, Calif. 94720 Article Metrics Article contents Abstract References Save PDF Save PDF (6 mb) View PDF [Opens in a new window] Save to Dropbox Save to Google Drive Save to Kindle Share Cite Rights & Permissions [Opens in a new window] Abstract Core share and HTML view are not available for this content. However, as you have access to this content, a full PDF is available via the 'Save PDF' action button. This article can be viewed as an attempt to explore the consequences of two propositions. (1) Intentionality in human beings (and animals) is a product of causal features of the brain. I assume this is an empirical fact about the actual causal relations between mental processes and brains. It says simply that certain brain processes are sufficient for intentionality. (2) Instantiating a computer program is never by itself a sufficient condition of intentionality. The main argument of this paper is directed at establishing this claim. The form of the argument is to show how a human agent could instantiate the program and still not have the relevant intentionality. These two propositions have the following consequences: (3) The explanation of how the brain produces intentionality cannot be that it does it by instantiating a computer program. This is a strict logical consequence of 1 and 2. (4) Any mechanism capable of producing intentionality must have causal powers equal to those of the brain. This is meant to be a trivial consequence of 1. (5) Any attempt literally to create intentionality artificially (strong AI) could not succeed just by designing programs but would have to duplicate the causal powers of the human brain. This follows from 2 and 4. “Could a machine think?” On the argument advanced here only a machine could think, and only very special kinds of machines, namely brains and machines with internal causal powers equivalent to those of brains. And that is why strong AI has little to tell us about thinking, since it is not about machines but about programs, and no program by itself is sufficient for thinking. Keywords artificial intelligence brain intentionality mind Information Type Target Article Information Behavioral and Brain Sciences , Volume 3 , Issue 3 , September 1980 , pp. 417 - 424 DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00005756 [Opens in a new window] Copyright Copyright © Cambridge University Press 1980 References Anderson , J. ( 1980 ) Cognitive units . Paper presented at the Society for Philosophy and Psychology, Ann Arbor, Mich. [RCS] Google Scholar PubMed Block , N. J. ( 1978 ) Troubles with functionalism. In: Minnesota studies in the philosophy of science, vol. 9 , ed. Savage , C. W. , Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press . [NB, WGL] Google Scholar Block , N. J. (forthcoming) Psychologism and behaviorism. Philosophical Review . [NB, WGL] Google Scholar Bower , G. H. ; Black , J. B. , & Turner , T. J. ( 1979 ) Scripts in text comprehension and memory . Cognitive Psychology 11 : 177 – 220 . [RCS] CrossRef Google Scholar Carroll , C. W. ( 1975 ) The great chess automaton . New York : Dover . [RP] Google Scholar Cummins , R. ( 1977 ) Programs in the explanation of behavior . Philosophy of Science 44 : 269 –87. [JCM] CrossRef Google Scholar Dennett , D. C. ( 1969 ) Content and consciousness . London : Routledge & Kegan Paul . [DD, TN] Google Scholar Dennett , D. C. ( 1971 ) Intentional systems . Journal of Philosophy 68 : 87 – 106 . [TN] CrossRef Google Scholar Dennett , D. C. ( 1972 ) Reply to Arbib and Gundérson . Paper presented at the Eastern Division meeting of the American Philosophical Association. Boston, Mass. [TN] Google Scholar Dennett , D. C. ( 1975 ) Why the law of effect won't go away . Journal for the Theory of Social Behavior 5 : 169 –87. [NB] CrossRef Google Scholar Dennett , D. C. ( 1978 ) Brainstorms . Montgomery, Vt. : Bradford Books . [DD, AS] Google Scholar Eccles , J. C. ( 1978 ) A critical appraisal of brain-mind theories. In: Cerebral correlates of conscious experiences , ed. Buser , P. A. and Rougeul-Buser , A. , pp. 347 –55. Amsterdam : North Holland . [JCE] Google Scholar Dennett , D. C. ( 1979 ) The human mystery . Heidelberg : Springer Verlag . [JCE] Google Scholar Fodor , J. A. ( 1968 ) The appeal to tacit knowledge in psychological explanation . Journal of Philosophy 65 : 627 –40. [NB] CrossRef Google Scholar Dennett , D. C. ( 1980 ) Methodological solopsism considered as a research strategy in cognitive psychology . The Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3 : 1 . [NB, WGL, WES] Google Scholar Freud , S. ( 1895 ) Project for a scientific psychology. In: The standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud , vol. 1 , ed. Strachey , J. . London : Hogarth Press, 1966 . [JCM] Google Scholar Frey , P. W. ( 1977 ) An introduction to computer chess. In: Chess skill in man and machine , ed. Frey , P. W. . New York, Heidelberg, Berlin : Springer-Verlag . [RP] Google Scholar Fryer , D. M. & Marshall , J. C. ( 1979 ) The motives of Jacques de Vaucanson . Technology and Culture 20 : 257 –69. [JCM] CrossRef Google Scholar Gibson , J. J. ( 1966 ) The senses considered as perceptual systems . Boston : Houghton Mifflin . [TN] Google Scholar Gibson , J. J. ( 1967 ) New reasons for realism . Synthese 17 : 162 –72. [TN] CrossRef Google Scholar Gibson , J. J. ( 1972 ) A theory of direct visual perception. In: The psychology of knowing ed. Royce , S. R. & Rozeboom , W. W. . New York : Gordon & Breach . [TN] Google Scholar Graesser , A. C. ; Gordon , S. E. ; & Sawyer , J. D. ( 1979 ) Recognition memory for typical and atypical actions in scripted activities: tests for a script pointer and tag hypotheses . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 1 : 319 –32. [RCS] CrossRef Google Scholar Gruendel , J. ( 1980 ). Scripts and stories: a study of children's event narratives. Ph.D. dissertation, Yale University . [RCS] Google Scholar Hanson , N. R. ( 1969 ) Perception and discovery . San Francisco : Freeman, Cooper . [DOW] Google Scholar Hayes , P. J. ( 1977 ) In defence of logic. In: Proceedings of the 5th international joint conference on artificial intelligence , ed. Reddy , R. . Cambridge, Mass. : M.I.T. Press . [WES] Google Scholar Hobbes , T. ( 1651 ) Leviathan . London : Willis . [JCM] Google Scholar Hofstadter , D. R. ( 1979 ) Gödel, Escher, Bach . New York : Basic Books . [DOW] Google Scholar Householder , F. W. ( 1962 ) On the uniqueness of semantic mapping . Word 18 : 173 –85. [JCM] CrossRef Google Scholar Huxley , T. H. ( 1874 ) On the hypothesis that animals are automata and its history. In: Collected Essays , vol. 1 . London : Macmillan, 1893 . [JCM] Google Scholar Kolers , P. A. & Smythe , W. E. ( 1979 ) Images, symbols, and skills . Canadian Journal of Psychology 33 : 158 –84. [WES] CrossRef Google Scholar PubMed Kosslyn , S. M. & Shwartz , S. P. ( 1977 ) A simulation of visual imagery . Cognitive Science 1 : 265 –95. [WES] Google Scholar Lenneberg , E. H. ( 1975 ) A neuropsychological comparison between man, chimpanzee and monkey . Neuropsychologia 13 : 125 . [JCE] Google Scholar Libet , B. ( 1973 ) Electrical stimulation of cortex in human subjects and conscious sensory aspects. In: Handbook of sensory physiology , vol. II , ed. Iggo , A. , pp. 743 –90. New York : Springer-Verlag . [BL] Google Scholar Libet , B. , Wright , E. W. Jr , Feinstein , B. , and Pearl , D. K. ( 1979 ) Subjective referral of the timing for a conscious sensory experience: a functional role for the somatosensory specific projection system in man . Brain 102 : 191 – 222 . [BL] CrossRef Google Scholar PubMed Longuet-Higgins , H. C. ( 1979 ) The perception of music . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 205 : 307 –22. [JCM] Google Scholar PubMed Lucas , J. R. ( 1961 ) Minds, machines, and Gödel . Philosophy 36 : 112 – 127 . [DRH] CrossRef Google Scholar Lycan , W. G. (forthcoming) Form, function, and feel . Journal of Philosophy . [NB, WGL] Google Scholar McCarthy , J. ( 1979 ) Ascribing mental qualities to machines. In: Philosophical perspectives in artificial intelligence , ed. Ringle , M. . Atlantic Highlands, N.J. : Humanities Press . [JM, JRS] Google Scholar Marr , D. & Poggio , T. ( 1979 ) A computational theory of human stereo vision . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 204 : 301 –28. [JCM] Google Scholar PubMed Marshall , J. C. ( 1971 ) Can humans talk? In: Biological and social factors in psycholinguistics , ed. Morton , J. . London : Logos Press . [JCM] Google Scholar Marshall , J. C. ( 1977 ) Minds, machines and metaphors . Social Studies of Science 7 : 475 –88. [JCM] CrossRef Google Scholar Maxwell , G. ( 1976 ) Scientific results and the mind-brain issue. In: Consciousness and the brain , ed. Globus , G. G. , Maxwell , G. , & Savodnik , I. . New York : Plenum Press . [GM] Google Scholar Maxwell , G. ( 1978 ) Rigid designators and mind-brain identity. In: Perception and cognition: Issues in the foundaions of psychology , Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 9 , ed. Savage , C. W. . Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press . [GM] Google Scholar Mersenne , M. ( 1636 ) Harmonie universelle . Paris : Le Gras . [JCM] Google Scholar Moor , J. H. ( 1978 ) Three myths of computer science . British Journal of the Philosophy of Science 29 : 213 –22. [JCM] CrossRef Google Scholar Nagel , T. ( 1974 ) What is it like to be a bat? Philosophical Review 83 : 435 –50. [GM] CrossRef Google Scholar Natsoulas , T. ( 1974 ) The subjective, experiential element in perception . Psychological Bulletin 81 : 611 –31. [TN] CrossRef Google Scholar PubMed Natsoulas , T. ( 1977 ) On perceptual aboutness . Behaviorism 5 : 75 – 97 . [TN] Google Scholar Natsoulas , T. ( 1978 a) Haugeland's first hurdle . Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1 : 243 . [TN] CrossRef Google Scholar Natsoulas , T. ( 1979 b) Residual subjectivity . American Psychologist 33 : 269 –83. [TN] CrossRef Google Scholar Natsoulas , T. ( 1980 ) Dimensions of perceptual awareness. Psychology Department, University of California , Davis . Unpublished manuscript. [TN] Google Scholar Nelson , K. & Gruendel , J. ( 1978 ) From person episode to social script: two dimensions in the development of event knowledge . Paper presented at the biennial meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development, San Francisco . [RCS] Google Scholar Newell , A. ( 1973 ) Production systems: models of control structures. In: Visual information processing , ed. Chase , W. C. . New York : Academic Press . [WES] Google Scholar Newell , A. ( 1979 ) Physical symbol systems. Lecture at the La Jolla Conference on Cognitive Science. [JRS] Google Scholar Newell , A. ( 1980 ) Harpy, production systems, and human cognition. In: Perception and production of fluent speech , ed. Cole , R. . Hillsdale, N.J. : Erlbaum Press . [WES] Google Scholar Newell , A. & Simon , H. A. ( 1963 ) GPS, a program that simulates human thought. In: Computers and thought , ed. Feigenbaum , A. & Feldman , V. , pp. 279 –93. New York : McGraw Hill . [JRS] Google Scholar Panofsky , E. ( 1954 ) Galileo as a critic of the arts . The Hague : Martínus Nijhoff . [JCM] CrossRef Google Scholar Popper , K. R. & Eccles , J. C. ( 1977 ) The self and its brain . Heidelberg : Springer-Verlag . [JCE, GM] CrossRef Google Scholar Putnam , H. ( 1960 ) Minds and machines. In: Dimensions of mind , ed. Hook , S. , pp. 138 –64. New York : Collier . [MR, RR] Google Scholar Putnam , H. ( 1975 a) The meaning of “meaning.” In: Mind, language and reality . Cambridge University Press . [NB, WGL] CrossRef Google Scholar Putnam , H. ( 1975 b) The nature of mental states. In: Mind, language and reality . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . [NB] CrossRef Google Scholar Putnam , H. ( 1975 c) Philosophy and our mental life. In: Mind, language and reality . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . [MM] CrossRef Google Scholar Pylyshyn , Z. W. ( 1980 a) Computation and cognition: issues in the foundations of cognitive science . Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3 . [JRS, WES] CrossRef Google Scholar Pylyshyn , Z. W. ( 1980 b) Cognitive representation and the process-architecture distinction. Behavioral and Brain Sciences . [ZWP] CrossRef Google Scholar Russell , B. ( 1948 ) Human knowledge: its scope and limits . New York : Simon and Schuster . [GM] Google Scholar Schank , R. C. & Abelson , R. P. ( 1977 ) Scripts, plans, goals, and understanding . Hillsdale, N.J. : Lawrence Erlbaum Press . [RCS, JRS] Google Scholar Searle , J. R. ( 1979 a) Intentionality and the use of language. In: Meaning and use , ed. Margalit , A. . Dordrecht : Reidel . [TN, JRS] Google Scholar Searle , J. R. ( 1979 b) The intentionality of intention and action . Inquiry 22 : 253 –80. [TN, JRS] CrossRef Google Scholar Searle , J. R. ( 1979 c) What is an intentional state? Mind 88 : 74 – 92 . [JH, GM, TN, JRS] CrossRef Google Scholar Sherrington , C. S. ( 1950 ) Introductory. In: The physical basis of mind , ed. Laslett , P. , Oxford : Basil Blackwell . [JCE] Google Scholar Slate , J. S. & Atkin , L. R. ( 1977 ) CHESS 4.5 – the Northwestern University chess program. In: Chess skill in man and machine , ed. Frey , P. W. . New York, Heidelberg, Berlin : Springer Verlag . Google Scholar Sloman , A. ( 1978 ) The computer revolution in philosophy . Harvester Press and Humanities Press . [AS] Google Scholar Sloman , A. ( 1979 ) The primacy of non-communicative language. In: The analysis of meaning (informatics 5) , ed. McCafferty , M. & Gray , K. . London : ASLIB and British Computer Society . [AS] Google Scholar Smith , E. E. ; Adams , N. ; & Schorr , D. ( 1978 ) Fact retrieval and the paradox of interference . Cognitive Psychology 10 : 438 –64. [RCS] CrossRef Google Scholar Smythe , W. E. ( 1979 ) The analogical/propositional debate about mental representation: a Goodmanian analysis . Paper presented at the 5th annual meeting of the Society for Philosophy and Psychology, New York City . [WES] Google Scholar Sperry , R. W. ( 1969 ) A modified concept of consciousness . Psychological Review 76 : 532 –36. [TN] CrossRef Google Scholar PubMed Sperry , R. W. ( 1970 ) An objective approach to subjective experience: further explanation of a hypothesis . Psychological Review 77 : 585 –90. [TN] CrossRef Google Scholar Sperry , R. W. ( 1976 ) Mental phenomena as causal determinants in brain function. In: Consciousness and the brain , ed. Globus , G. G. , Maxwell , G. , & Savodnik , I. . New York : Plenum Press . [TN] Google Scholar Stich , S. P. (in preparation) On the ascription of content. In: Entertaining thoughts , ed. Woodfield , A. . [WGL] Google Scholar Thorne , J. P. ( 1968 ) A computer model for the perception of syntactic structure . Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 171 : 377 –86. [JCM] Google Scholar PubMed Turing , A. M. ( 1964 ) Computing machinery and intelligence. In: Minds and machines , ed. Anderson , A. R. , pp. 4 – 30 . Englewood Cliffs, N.J. : Prentice-Hall . [MR] Google Scholar Weizenbaum , J. ( 1965 ) Eliza – a computer program for the study of natural language communication between man and machine . Communication of the Association for Computing Machinery 9 : 36 – 45 . [JRS] CrossRef Google Scholar Weizenbaum , J. ( 1976 ) Computer power and human reason . San Francisco : W. H. Freeman . [JRS] Google Scholar Winograd , T. ( 1973 ) A procedural model of language understanding. In: Computer models of thought and language , ed. Schank , R. & Colby , K. . San Francisco : W. H. Freeman . [JRS] Google Scholar Winston , P. H. ( 1977 ) Artificial intelligence . Reading, Mass. Addison-Wesley ; [JRS] Google Scholar Woodruff , G. & Premack , D. ( 1979 ) Intentional communication in the chimpanzee: the development of deception . Cognition 7 : 333 –62. [JCM] CrossRef Google Scholar You have Access 3768 Cited by Cited by Loading... Cited by 3768 Crossref Citations This article has been cited by the following publications. This list is generated based on data provided by Crossref . Sloman, Aaron 1981. Deep and shallow simulations . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 548. CrossRef Google Scholar Revlin, Russell 1981. Evaluation of a model's test . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 547. CrossRef Google Scholar Reid, William H. and Riedler, John F. 1981. Psychiatry and computers: An uneasy synthesis . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 547. CrossRef Google Scholar Pinkava, V. 1981. The dichotomous predicament of contemporary psychology . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 546. CrossRef Google Scholar Scott Kelso, J. A. Holt, Kenneth G. Rubin, Philip and Kugler, Peter N. 1981. Patterns of Human Interlimb Coordination Emerge from the Properties of Non-Linear, Limit Cycle Oscillatory Processes . Journal of Motor Behavior, Vol. 13, Issue. 4, p. 226. CrossRef Google Scholar Colby, Kenneth Mark 1981. PARRYing . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 550. CrossRef Google Scholar Teller, Virginia and Dahl, Hartvig 1981. Clinical artificial intelligence . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 549. CrossRef Google Scholar Swanson, David W. 1981. Is PARRY paranoid? . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 548. CrossRef Google Scholar 1981. The Handbook of Artificial Intelligence . p. 363. CrossRef Google Scholar Carbonell, Jaime G. 1981. Issues in computer modeling of cognitive phenomena: An artificial intelligence perspective . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 536. CrossRef Google Scholar Agassi, Joseph 1981. Simulation? . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 535. CrossRef Google Scholar Abelson, Robert P. 1981. Going after PARRY . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 534. CrossRef Google Scholar Colby, Kenneth Mark 1981. Modeling a paranoid mind . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 515. CrossRef Google Scholar Lindsay, Robert 1981. How smart must you be to be crazy? . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 541. CrossRef Google Scholar Kochen, Manfred 1981. On the generality of PARRY, Colby's paranoia model . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 540. CrossRef Google Scholar Izard, C. E. and Masterson, F. A. 1981. Colby's paranoia model: An old theory in a new frame? . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 539. CrossRef Google Scholar Gunderson, Keith 1981. Paranoia concerning program-resistant aspects of the mind - and let's drop rocks on Turing's toes again . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 537. CrossRef Google Scholar Oatley, Keith 1981. Modeling paranoia: The cargo cult metaphor . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 545. CrossRef Google Scholar Moor, James 1981. Al and cargo cult science . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 544. CrossRef Google Scholar Miller, James R. 1981. PARRY and the evaluation of cognitive models . Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Vol. 4, Issue. 4, p. 543. CrossRef Google Scholar Download full list Google Scholar Citations View all Google Scholar citations for this article. × Cancel Confirm ×