URL: https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs11019-020-09948-1

A critical perspective on guidelines for responsible and trustworthy artificial intelligence | Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy | Springer Nature Link Skip to main content Advertisement Log in A critical perspective on guidelines for responsible and trustworthy artificial intelligence Scientific Contribution Published: 31 March 2020 Volume 23 , pages 387–399, ( 2020 ) Cite this article Access provided by Specialized Presidential Council for Educ and Scientific Research Portal Download PDF Save article View saved research Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy Aims and scope Submit manuscript A critical perspective on guidelines for responsible and trustworthy artificial intelligence Download PDF Banu Buruk ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-2272-5865 1 , Perihan Elif Ekmekci ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0777-3861 1 & Berna Arda ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-2043-2444 2 5446 Accesses 65 Citations 4 Altmetric Explore all metrics Abstract Artificial intelligence (AI) is among the fastest developing areas of advanced technology in medicine. The most important qualia of AI which makes it different from other advanced technology products is its ability to improve its original program and decision-making algorithms via deep learning abilities. This difference is the reason that AI technology stands out from the ethical issues of other advanced technology artifacts. The ethical issues of AI technology vary from privacy and confidentiality of personal data to ethical status and value of AI entities in a wide spectrum, depending on their capability of deep learning and scope of the domains in which they operate. Developing ethical norms and guidelines for planning, development, production, and usage of AI technology has become an important issue to overcome these problems. In this respect three outstanding documents have been produced: 1. The Montréal Declaration for Responsible Development of Artificial Intelligence 2. Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI 3. Asilomar Artificial Intelligence Principles In this study, these three documents will be analyzed with respect to the ethical principles and values they involve, their perspectives for approaching ethical issues, and their prospects for ethical reasoning when one or more of these values and principles are in conflict. Then, the sufficiency of these guidelines for addressing current or prospective ethical issues emerging from the existence of AI technology in medicine will be evaluated. The discussion will be pursued in terms of the ambiguity of interlocutors and efficiency for working out ethical dilemmas occurring in practical life. Similar content being viewed by others The Artificial Intelligence Doctor: Considerations for the Clinical Implementation of Ethical AI Chapter © 2022 Principles alone cannot guarantee ethical AI Article 04 November 2019 The Ethical Principles that Guide Artificial Intelligence Utilization in Clinical Health Care Chapter © 2022 Explore related subjects Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. Computer Ethics Dental ethics Ethics of Technology Medical Ethics Meta-Ethics Philosophy of Artificial Intelligence Artificial Intelligence Applications in Healthcare Decision Support Introduction At first glance, artificial intelligence (AI) reminds us of artificial machines perceived as merely sci-fi which might take over humanity one day. However, whether we are using its products consciously or not, AI can be found in everyday life. It is in our smartphones providing touch/face recognition and other guiding assistance, for example, anticipating users’ next actions based on the current action by referencing their habits; in our smart cars with self-parking features; in navigation systems suggesting efficient routes to destinations we search for by using a neural network system; even a mobile robot navigating an unknown environment (Patle 2018 ). AI is inevitably used for social media to send personalized notifications to users’ timelines by factoring in their past web searches and interactions or other types of users’ mobility on that social media platform. It is effective in automated customer support applications which help us find a particular product we want to buy, and in the finance sector such as detecting credit card fraud, measuring credit risk, and robo-advisory (Wall 2018 ). AI is also used in the education field to customize educational content, create innovative teaching methods, and facilitate communication between students and lecturers (Chassignol et al 2018 ). Last but not least, healthcare systems derive benefits by using AI technology for digital consultations and proper medication management for patients (Jiang et al. 2017 ). AI enables physicians, healthcare providers, and pharmaceutical experts to achieve better results in the health sciences such as advanced diagnosis, personalized medicine, and drug design. In the fields of surgery and radiology, especially for complex surgery interventions, AI helps to capture and process large amounts of image data. In the field of cardiology, AI is helpful for cardiac imaging by segmentation and identification of health issues, the classification of images cataloged by different sources, and lesion detection (Dorado-Diaz et al. 2019 ). For hospital administration processes, medical records are kept digitally by efficient and accurate AI applications, resulting in the ability to provide real-time patient statistics information both to the physician and the patient (Haleem et al. 2019 ). Although AI is being used in many different fields of human life, its definition is interchangeable as no general theory of intelligence or learning exists which would unite the discipline (Moor 2006 ). Before the 1950s, computers could be instructed to perform tasks but were unable to store information about their actions (Anyoha 2017 ). Alan Turing, who was a mathematician and logician often referred to as the father of modern computing, asked the crucial question, “Can machines think?” in 1950, which opened the path to assigning human intelligence features to machines, in other words the start of AI technology improvement (Turing 1950 ). The thinking process is dependent on cognition and intelligence features, and these are characteristic of human beings and AI which is a non-living entity. The concept of AI was first introduced into the literature in 1956 at an historic conference titled “Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence” which was the event that initiated AI as a research discipline (Moor 2006 ). Since then, the progress of AI technology has been accelerated by improvement of machine learning algorithms. AI technology should be able to simulate the features of “human brain intelligence,” characterized as learning, predicting, analyzing, and creating solutions (Say 2018 ). As a general definition, AI technology is the process of developing systems which are endowed with the intellectual processes characteristic of humans, such as the ability to reason, discover meaning, generalize, or learn from past experience abilities that can be assigned to a machine. Consequently, research in AI has focused mainly on the following components of intelligence: learning, reasoning, problem-solving, perception, and using language (Artificial Intelligence 2019 ). According to the Future of Life Institute, the AI that can be found currently is the form of narrow/weak AI which is described as “the technology designed to perform narrow tasks such as only facial recognition or only internet searches or only driving a car” (Future of Life 2016 ). Researchers are working on the improvement of today’s AI capabilities to create a strong, or general AI (AGI) which has all the cognitive abilities that are performed by a real human brain (Future of Life 2016 ). According to the Montreal Declaration for a Responsible Development of Artificial Intelligence, AI technology has the possibility to create autonomous systems capable of performing complex tasks of which natural intelligence alone was thought capable: processing large quantities of information, calculating, and predicting, learning and adapting responses to changing situations, and recognizing, and classifying objects.” A European Commission document titled A definition of AI: Main Capabilities and Scientific Disciplines defines AI as “the system[s] that display intelligent behavior by analyzing their environment and taking actions – with some degree of autonomy – to achieve specific goals (MDRDAI 2018b ). According to the above-mentioned application areas and definitions, AI enables users to obtain safer, more accurate, and effective results in a shorter time and make accurate inferences about the future. So, the advantages of AI are more about time, security, accuracy, and foresight; all of which create a comfort zone to today's people. Lifestyles and speed of technology are dependent on this comfort area which is provided by AI by self-managing many choices and decision-making processes, as a result of gaining a form of personhood situation. Such dependency and personal conditions place AI in a more effective and powerful position, and thus ethical standards are required. To this end, developing ethics guidelines for the planning, development, production, and usage of AI technology is crucial. In this respect there are three outstanding ethics guideline documents for AI as follows: 1. The Montréal Declaration for Responsible Development of Artificial Intelligence released by the Montréal University with the participation of non-governmental organizations (NGOs), academicians, specialists, and policy developers in 2018. (Hereinafter referred to as MDRDAI.) 2. Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI published by the European Commission in 2019. (Hereinafter referred to as EGTAI.) 3. Asilomar Artificial Intelligence Principles were developed and published in conjunction with the 2017 Asilomar Conference. (Hereinafter referred to as AAIP.) AI, as all the other emerging technologies; could adapt very quickly to our daily lives, we now use it more and more, and therefore we face more ethical problems. However, there are also new norms and values brought upon by AI; its` ability to improve its original program and decision-making algorithms via deep learning abilities. This autonomy makes AI unique among all other advanced technologies in terms of ethical issues. Confidentiality, security, responsibility, equality, accountability and transparency are at the forefront of ethical issues associated with AI. In this sense, different stakeholders and people from different disciplines started to voice AI related subjects. The first document, which was released by Montréal University where a meaningful amount of AI research is being conducted, aims to orient the development of AI to support the common good, and guide social changes by making recommendations in a collective manner. The way to the preparation of the Montréal Declaration for a Responsible Development of Artificial Intelligence, firstly in November 2017 The Forum on the Socially Responsible Development of Artificial Intelligence was held in Montreal. This forum was arranged to invite the public to contribute in discussing the issues of responsible artificial intelligence. In the following years, from 2017 to 2018 people having different backgrounds such as computer science, ethics, and other related disciplines participated in meetings, discussions, and philosophy workshops The Quebec Commission on Ethics in Science and Technology had also participated to these discussions. As a result in December 2018, the Montréal Declaration for a Responsible Development of Artificial Intelligence by Montréal University has been prepared on the basis of the discussions held by different people from expertise fields (MDRDAI 2018a ). The second document, published by the European Commission and first presented by the High-Level Expert Group on AI, defines “trustworthy AI” in three dimensions: lawful, ethical, and robust. According to the European Commission’s “united in diversity” motto; AI has a great potential to cause socio-economic changes; so there is a need to get prepared for these changes by the brainstorming of more than 500 contributors. Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI has been prepared by the contribution from public and the High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence, and it is continuously open for revisions.” (EC 2019 ). The third document, which was developed during the 2017 Asilomar Conference, is a representation of awareness of the changes resulting from AI technology which affect every person in society, underlying the shared responsibility of all people in and out of AI research. The preparation process of The Asilomar Principles of Future of Life Institute had been started with the sense among the 2017 Conference on the Future of Artificial Intelligence attendees. Due to rising awareness of AI, many important reports have emerged from academia (e.g. the Stanford 100-year report), government (e.g. two major reports from the White House), and the nonprofit sector. The opinions in these reports have been gathered, checked for any overlaps and scored to create the 23 principles (Future of Life 2017 a). Recently various agencies have made efforts to produce guidelines to regulate the ethics of AI. Out of these, we selected the above three because of their unique features, namely, that they were written in collaboration by professionals from various backgrounds who have a wide area of influence, regulative powers, and who are highly regarded by academicians and professionals alike. In this study, we analyzed these three documents based on the ethical principles and values they contain. Subsequently, we analyzed each document's approach to ethical issues and ethical analysis of the values to which they refer when one or more of these values are in conflict. We also analyzed these documents according to their citations to the bioethics field, their content acquisition, their impact, and future scenarios they draw. Methods All three AI ethics guidelines examined in this article express different values at different dimensions from research to consumer use, and from human rights to environmental sensitivity. Our justification for the selection of these AI guideline documents is mainly based on the decision on selecting policy documents including guidelines those are expressed in a normative ethical concept. We searched Google, Google Scholar and Web of Science databases for the guidelines themselves and articles on “artificial intelligence ethics”, “artificial intelligence principles” and “artificial intelligence guidelines”. We shaped our literature search according to the inclusion/exclusion criteria as follows: 1. We excluded the documents those were written more than 3 years ago, all the three documents are current and up to date. 2. We chose to make a comparison between issuers from different environments. Thus, the issuers of the selected documents reflects different point of views, “Montréal Declaration for a Responsible Development of Artificial Intelligence” reflects the academic background, “The Asilomar Principles” of Future of Life Institute reflects the combination of private sector backgrounds and European Commission’s “Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI” document reflects the governmental and political background. 3. We excluded the national goals of countries and the AI documents prepared by national governments; we rather preferred to study international sights. 4. The selected documents are all written in the countries where AI technology is being developed and the AI research is funded with meaningful budgets. In the literature, it is possible to encounter different AI guidelines from different countries such as Japan, China and Australia. However, according to our selection criteria 3; we excluded the guidelines that mainly refer to a national context. 5. The authors of all the selected documents are from different backgrounds, we excluded the evaluation of the documents reflecting the limited number of expertise. 6. The selected documents are the widest range of documents in terms of criteria based on ethical values they touch upon. 7. The selected documents are the documents are not written and covered, but are documents that are open for revisions over time. 8. All documents selected are original documents being frequently cited sources in the literature. The guideline documents selected do not qualify for the continuation of other documents, and do not reference the documents written before than them. After the document selection, we analyzed their content with a matrix prepared according to their subtitles. We found that a few similar topics are included in different titles of each document. In addition, we identified the themes of each document that do not correspond to other documents. The selection of the criteria given in Table 1 for comparison is based on the brainstorming process with the above methodological process. We focused on criteria that are compatible with each other and refer to the documents. Then we studied the issues on which all three documents are focused, such as equality, prioritization of justice, and non-discrimination in the development and use of AI technologies. Following this, we searched for the possibility of revision of the documents as AI technology evolves. We also studied the ways in which AI is portrayed by the documents, whether it is perceived as a tool or as a purpose, and also whether or not they have a human-centric approach. Finally, we analyzed the terminology created for the development and implementation of AI technology and its equivalent in the documents and end with conclusion remarks. Table 1 Criterion used for the comparison of guidelines Full size table Results All the documents have been written within the same timeframe and are also current. Therefore, the development process of AI technology applies to all three documents. Although researchers from different fields of specialization took part in the writing stages, opinions of people with different statuses were taken and opinions were exchanged among many stakeholders. However, as most computer science experts are concentrated in certain areas, that is, more developed countries, some geographic areas such as Africa, South and Central America, and Central Asia do not have equal participation in the preparation of these guidelines, thus developed countries are more influential in shaping possible ethical dimensions of AI technology than others (Jobin et al. 2019 ). Still, both MDRDAI and AAIP are open to online signatures for anyone wishing to support these guidelines and, so far, 1583 researchers from AI and robotics and 3447 from other fields have signed the AAIP (Future of Life 2017 b). Criteria date, authors, and target groups Table 2 below outlines the general properties of the guidelines, that is, the first three criteria we used for comparison: date, authors, and target group. Table 2 The general properties of documents with regard to the first comparison criteria Full size table It was found that the issues on which all three documents are focused are similar to each other. All underline the need for equality, prioritization of justice, and non-discrimination in the development and use of AI technologies by preventing social inequalities, power imbalances, and lifestyle impositions. All the documents perceive AI as a tool, not as a purpose, but in different ways. MDRDAI declares AI as a tool for the well-being of humans which is stated in the first principle as, “The development and the use of AI systems must permit the growth of the well-being of all sentient beings” (MDRDAI 2018b ). The second document, EGTAI, published by the European Commission, declares AI as a tool in the same direct manner as MDRDAI; pointing out that, “AI use should be in the service of humanity and the common good, with the goal of improving human welfare and freedom” (EC, 2019). The third document, AAIP, also perceives AI as a tool, albeit in two stages. The first principle of the Asilomar document declares that, “The goal of AI research should be to create not undirected intelligence, but beneficial intelligence” (Future of Life 2017 b). The latter’s first principle shows us that AAIP perceives AI as a tool for the good of mankind, but “beneficial intelligence” is reached in the second stage. The first stage is to create a superintelligence by avoiding the assumptions regarding upper limits on future AI capabilities. This means that the first purpose is to create a human-level AI intelligence, while the second purpose is to develop this superintelligence into a form which will share common ethical ideals for the common good. In this sense, the Asilomar AI principles do not undervalue the possibility of human-level AI. Furthermore, it perceives AI as a tool for the benefit of all humanity rather than one group of people or profit motivated organizations. In respect of the AI perception in the Asilomar document, the probability of future discrimination and non-equality is foreseen as a long-term issue. Accordingly, the AI perception of all documents shows that all three are in favor of human-centric AI. The human-centric feature of AI is directly related with the user-centric design for especially disabled people. Within the scope of the principles of equality and justice, it should be indispensable to design the AI technology developed to improve the well-being of all people including healthy and disabled persons. In fact, in this context, the potential power of AI should be supported in order to eliminate inequalities between people and to equip disabled people to access the benefits of technology. However, none of the documents touch upon the issues about AI usage by disabled people. In addition, all the documents are active documents, open to revision according to the accumulation of scientific knowledge and techniques in line with feedback from different actors such as users, scientists, lawyers, ethicists, etc. Criteria referenced values Our fourth comparison criterion is “the referenced ethics values” in documents. MDRDAI includes 10 principles; EGTAI includes 11 principles in a combination of four ethical principles with seven key requirements; whereas AAIP covers 23 principles. Table 3 below lists the principles of the three documents, respectively. In addition, Table 4 shows the principles of the three documents with the classification of the criteria between criteria 5 and 10; these are listed in Table 1 and are compatible with each other in all three documents. As a result, we classified the compatible principles in six categories. The first category we developed is “human control” which covers responsibility, human agency-oversight, responsibility, and human control. The second category is “autonomy on the basis of personal data” which covers respect for autonomy and protection of privacy-intimacy, respect for autonomy, prevention of harm and privacy-data governance, personal privacy, and liberty-privacy. The third category is “transparency and globalization” that covers democratic participation, explicability, transparency and accountability, and failure of transparency. The fourth category is “security” which covers prudence, technical robustness-safety, safety, and risks. The fifth is “utility” which covers well-being, societal and environmental well-being, shared benefit, shared prosperity, and the common good. The final, sixth category is “equality and justice,” which covers solidarity, equity, diversity inclusion, fairness, diversity, non-discrimination and fairness, judicial transparency, and non-subversion. There are also some principles unique to documents such as sustainable development for MDRDAI; and research goals, research funding, science-policy link, research culture, race avoidance, value alignment, human values, AI-arms race, capability caution, importance, and recursive self-improvement for AAIP. EGTAI does not include any ethical principle that is not mentioned in the other two documents. Table 3 The principles included in the documents, respectively, MDRDAI, EGTAI, and AAIP Full size table Table 4 Categorization of the principles included by the documents, respectively, MDRDAI, EGTAI, and AAIP (according to their compatibility) Full size table The categorization is mainly related to the criteria which are compatible with each other and refer to the documents. Although the documents use mostly the same terminology and the criteria in Table 4 refer to categories such as human control or transparency, each document deals with these categories from different perspectives. Thus, our criteria from 5 to 10 constitutes the categorization of principles under which we drew comparisons of compatible values. Criterion human control All three documents speak the same language in terms of human control during the use of AI technology; however, they all differ in their approaches. The differences in approach are more about the level of human control in action. MDRDAI’s approach is inclined toward reinforced human control over AI technologies. The document states that the decrease in human responsibility in decision-making processes with the development of AI technology should not be directly proportional. Even if the speed of technology development accelerates, AI human control should not be reduced. So MDRDAI underlines the notion that the final decision after an AI process should be taken by a “free and informed person.” EGTAI prioritizes human control in a different way. It states that human control and responsibility issues are important for the protection of autonomy. The first key requirement mentioned in the document, which is “Human agency and oversight,” summarizes the need for human control over AI. According to this requirement, human control can be achieved through several processes. First, human-in-the loop (HITL) means the presence of human intervention in every decision cycle of the AI system. In fact, a continuous human intervention is not a feasible method and furthermore, it is against the logic of AI, the purpose of which is to make human work easier. As a result, HITL is not the preferred process. Second, human-on-the loop (HOTL) implies the capability for human intervention during AI system design and monitoring. The third possible process is the human-in-command (HIC) process. This refers to the human process of overseeing the activity of the AI system and human decision-making about when and how to use the AI system in any particular situation (EC 2019 ). The human-in-command process refers to human control at the level of the decision regarding the question, “For what purpose will the AI system be used?” According to the HIC process, the job of deciding at which stages of our lives and for what purpose AI will work should be left to the human himself. All HITL, HOTL and HIC processes envisage human control at a certain level of AI activity. According to EGTAI, there should be less human control over an AI system and there has to be stricter governance, which actually means a different kind of human control that is not in the AI system cycle but is rather an external one. However, AAIP considers the potential for realization of decision-making cycles in which humans are not involved. AAIP moves one step further than the HIC process, where there is no human control over the purpose for which AI technology should be used. AAIP considers the possibility, even the reality, that AI intelligence will reach the level of human intelligence at some point in the future. Therefore, the “human control” principle in the document states that “Humans should choose how and whether to delegate decisions to AI systems, to accomplish human-chosen objectives” (Future of Life 2017 b). In short, AAIP states that before moving on to the age of self-controllable AI technology, people should work on designs that make it effective in compliance with ethical standards. Criterion autonomy on the basis of personal data In terms of respect for autonomy and the rights regarding personal data, all three documents approach the issue from different angles. First, MDRDAI says that everyone should protect their right to personal data. This means that deciding the fate of personal data should rest with the person who owns that data. EGTAI produces discourse on the same path as MDRDAI but adds that the personal data of vulnerable groups require special attention. On the other hand, AAIP states that people need to have control over the data they produce (not own) and that AI technology applied to personal data should not restrict people's freedom. However, AAIP does not express an opinion about human autonomy of his/her own personal data. It is certain that the main challenge regarding the use of personal data is the aggregation of data, in terms of defining the use of it that could directly affect the individual (IEEE 2019 ). The guidelines do not provide direct explanations for the aggregation of personal data used by AI systems, nor do they offer solutions for the orientation of such big data. Criterion transparency and globalization All three documents discuss transparency of different subjects. MDRDAI argues the transparency issue under the principle “Democratic participation.” In essence, this principle underlines the importance of the transparency of the code of AI technology algorithms in front of public authorities. Here, the principle of transparency is being correlated with the principle of justice, i.e. saying that an equality between people from different backgrounds/countries/societies should be ensured. Still, the document says that some of the code of decision-making algorithms should remain confidential; applying the principle of “as open as possible, as closed as necessary.” EGTAI mostly focuses on the issue of transparency and globalization under the principles of explicability, transparency, and accountability. According to the document there is a need for traceability, controllability, and reporting of the adverse impacts of AI technology for accountability/correction, and the protection of whistleblowers involved in these reports. The principle of explicability describes technical transparency; which means the necessity for understandability of the AI system by human beings. In other words, this means there should be no black box case related to AI applications. In this sense, the explicability principle is related to the democratic participation of MDRDAI which prioritizes the transparency of the code of AI technology algorithms. At this point, HITL, or HOTL, may be useful for such technical transparency. Moreover, as the document itself states, the second principle of transparency is closely related to the principle of explicability. The transparency principle mostly underlines the quintessence of traceability of AI systems while they are gathering, processing, and reasoning the data. The document notes that transparency and traceability are must-haves for the auditability and explicability of AI technology. Communication is another issue mentioned in the transparency principle of EGTAI; it refers to the requirement that AI systems should not look like real people. Users should be able to identify whether they are interacting with human intelligence or artificial intelligence. This level of transparency is important for the protection of autonomy because this is directly related to the right of a person to know the source of information presented in the decision process, or who or what kind of technological device manages it. The third document, AAIP, deals with the transparency issue under the principle “failure transparency” by explaining the need to share unsuccessful results of AI technology groups with competitors. AAIP declares that high-tech companies should cooperate in their R&D processes during the commercial development of AI technology by sharing information as this would be ethically appropriate rather than storing, or hiding, information from each other during R&D. Criterion security MDRDAI analyzes the security issue under the prudence principle. As the title of the principle suggests, security should be ensured by foreseeing undesirable results. The principle itself states that “Every person in AI development must exercise caution by anticipating, as far as possible, the adverse consequences of AI use and by taking the appropriate measures to avoid them.” (MDRDAI 2018b ). The document both underlines the necessity for the projection of negative results and also the necessity for the identification of cases that are used outside the purpose of AI. Here the document also touches indirectly on the issue of malevolence. EGTAI focuses on the subject of security under the principle “technical robustness and safety.” According to the document, safety for both the AI system as well as those using it should be ensured. An AI system can only be safe if technical robustness is enabled. An AI system should be robust enough to protect the data of the user from operational or system interacting agents. On the other hand, EGTAI discusses “the level of safety” as a matter of fact. Level of safety means the “the level of accuracy”; in other words, the security level of the service offered by an AI technology. The document states that, “The level of safety measures required depends on the magnitude of the risk posed by an AI system, which in turn depends on the system’s capabilities.” (EC 2019 ). Achieving technical robustness is the result of concentrated R&D process of AI technology. The level of technical robustness achieved as a result of each R&D process may differ; some may be statistically more accurate, while some may produce less accurate results. Thus, the issue of safety is directly related to the trustworthiness of AI technology in this sense. AAIP deals with the security issue by two principles; safety and risks. With these two principles, the document takes issue with future scenarios. The safety principle talks the same language with the prudence principle of MDRDAI, which states the need for taking appropriate precautions to avoid undesired results. Therefore, AAIP declares that AI systems should be inspected throughout their operational lifetime. In particular, AAIP mentions plans for measures that are directly proportional to risk, in order to mitigate catastrophe and existential risks. Criterion utility Although all three documents make different naming for the principles about utility, their contents are similar to each other. The well-being principle of MDRDAI mentions “growth of the well-being of all sentient beings.” Thus, it would be true to say that the common good approach covers not just human rights but animal rights which should be regarded as a humanistic attend. EGTAI’s societal and environmental well-being principles also give credit to sentient beings as well the environment under the issue of sustainability. The document makes a correlation between the two principles of fairness and prevention of harm under the well-being principle. EGTAI also considers the well-being of future generations. AAIP deals with the utility issue with three principles: shared benefit, shared prosperity, and common good. The shared benefit and shared prosperity principles declare a globalized approach, that is, benefit to all people or as many people as possible worldwide. While, on the other hand, the common good principle addresses the possibility of superintelligence—a scenario which can be named as “AI beyond human intelligence.” The AAIP’s common good principle states that superintelligence should be developed for the benefit of all humanity, rather than a group of people who develop or own that technology. Criterion equality and justice MDRDAI deals with equality and justice issues with three principles: solidarity, equity, and diversity inclusion. In common, these principles talk about respect and tolerance to different lifestyles, cultures, and thoughts, as well as future generations. According to the Montréal document diversity is important for maintaining justice for the development and usage of AI technologies. EGTAI considers the issue by addressing objectivity with two principles: fairness and diversity-nondiscrimination-fairness. First, the document explains the necessity of the balance between competing interests and objectives in terms of ensuring there is no unfair bias. The fairness principle also correlates this balance issue with the prevention of discrimination and stigmatization. The second principle mentions universal design, ensuring equal access through inclusive design processes in which the AI systems are user-centric. Here it states that an AI system should be accessible to all people regardless of their backgrounds, culture, age, gender, or restrictions. EGTAI promotes equality and justice by promoting accessible AI technologies for both children and adults, and healthy and disabled people, considering also the vulnerable group’s right to benefit from the advantages of AI products. AAIP analyzes equality and justice issues with two principles: judicial transparency and non-subversion. Judicial transparency means openness of the judicial decision-making process, and if this process is operated by an artificial intelligence then it should be monitored by a competent human authority. On the other hand, the principle non-subversion places responsibility on highly advanced AI systems to respect and improve the social and civic processes on which the health of society depends. Criterion bioethics citation The solidarity principle of MDRDAI cites bioethical issues in stating that AI systems that provide health care should be considered important in patient-physician relations. The document is still onside with humanistic technology, and heeds real human to human interactions. EGTAI provides direct examples of the use of AI in the health care field to protect human life. Examples include assisting caregivers, supplying elderly care, monitoring patients’ conditions, early diagnosis, and efficient drug design. On the other hand, AAIP does not refer directly to bioethics, but the use of personal data is addressed under the principle of liberty and privacy stating that “The application of AI to personal data must not unreasonably curtail people’s real or perceived liberty.” This means that the personal health data of persons should stay confidential and should not change the status of the liberty of the person to whom that data belongs. Actually, some unique statements could be added to these guidelines, for example, the Belmont Report on human subject research, in terms of developing AI assisted or oriented health technologies (Goering and Yusta 2016 ). Furthermore, research developing AI technologies for improving human health should also have user-centered design in terms of helping researchers to note different perspectives of those with disabilities, from different cultures, or even from different generations (Guan 2019 ). Today, AI technology is being used to analize large-scale information of DNA, proteins, and especially the protein–protein interactions. Such big data is being used for drug design, for accurate clinical decisions, for diagnostic tools, for developing preventive treatment methods and also for personalized medicine approach. Some of these AI implementation examples have been mentioned in EGTAI document’s “Health and Well-being” title, however privacy and confidentiality issues have not been associated with the big data issue which is indispensable to AI research in healthcare. AI technology is data dependent; the more data, the faster AI can learn. AI can produce more accurate results this way. However, the data used to feed AI’s learning process in medicine is health data, and this data is called as sensitive data, which can lead to unwanted results such as discrimination. Confidentiality prevents personal health data from being propagated improperly and misuse. Today, personal health data are now kept only in the locked locker of the physician who communicates with the patient, but in electronic environments where other medical staff such as technical people, hospital manager and molecular biologist can also reach. The technological conveniences provided by AI cause patient data to be more accessible and therefore more sensitive. Another issue about AI usage in medicine is the long-term risks and benefits. In the documents, long-term benefit-risk analysis of AI implementation in health field has not been addressed. Actually this problem is a common problem for all emerging technologies such as the nano-toxicity of nano materials in nano-medicine (Madannejada et al. 2019 ). However, AI has a leading role among other emerging technologies by having self-learning capacity. This feature of AI allows it to be capable of determining potential risks and benefits for human health. Moreover, none of the documents discuss the possibility of the substantial change in the concept of self, or human enhancement by AI technology scenarios. In the context of medical ethics, the standards of normal functioning, disease, ability expectation, treatment and enhancement should be highlighted. Another ethical issue about human enhancement by AI is the decision about who will have access to these opportunities, in terms of the principles fairness and justice. Criteria future scenarios and ethics analysis methods We could not have imagined 100 years ago that we would reach our current technological level, and today we may have difficulty predicting the maximum capacity of AI a further 100 years from now. Therefore, we should not assume that AI has an upper limit, and ethical principles should not be established according to this possibility. Believing that there may be an upper limit for AI means that we would have to limit its potential strength and potential benefits. In this context, the first two of the guidelines, MDRDAI and EGTAI, both apply the HOTL approach toward future AI; in these guidelines there is no room for superintelligence. On the other hand, the faster and more robust the connectivity of an AI system, the more autonomous it will become, in other words, it will move closer to a state of superintelligence (Chimuka 2019 ). AAIP argues for the possibility of a superintelligence one day in the future, and does not support placing an upper limit on AI technology. Moreover, when we encounter an ethical dilemma about the possible consequences of an AI system, the guidelines may be helpful in identifying the possible options, but not necessarily helpful for evaluating and choosing the best option among them. Therefore, in terms of the ethical analysis methods of the guidelines there is no hierarchy among the ethical principles of these guidelines. For example, EGTAI states that at times the principle of prevention of harm and the principle of human autonomy may be in conflict. In such a situation, EGTAI advises that an evidence-based solution rather than intuition or a random one should be preferred. This stills leaves the principle evaluation process to AI developers and users. Discussion Today AI is weak in that it is specialized in only one specific task. General AI is certainly on the way, and future generations, or even we, will witness AI technology that can perform complex tasks in the same way as a real human brain. As a result, we believe that the potentiality of superintelligence must be considered. Such foresight is very important for the ethical dimensions of AI technology as discussed above, especially human control, transparency, and safety issues (Tegmark 2017 ; Bostrom 2014 ). Even though it is widely believed that human-level AI is not yet on the doorstep and the probability of creating an AI system capable of fully mimicking very complex/open-ended real human world remains in the future (Marcus and Davis 2019 ); we maintain that even a low probability rate should be taken into account. Such an approach is necessary in terms of ethics if the purpose is to set the ideals even for the worst scenario of future AI in order to prevent possible bad consequences for human dignity before they materialize. Human controlled AI is inevitable for the MDRDAI and EGTAI guidelines, whereas AAIP looks beyond the human condition. Beyond human AI refers to the cognitive and moral sufficiency of an AI system which is able to conduct free decision-making processes. However, even AAIP does not support an AI system free of human control in the case of judicial decision-making processes. The issue of justice of AI technology draws a critical boundary around the decision about what is lawful or not, or the decision about who is guilty or not. Although new AI systems are being developed that can undertake some of the functions of the legal profession, the ethics guidelines still do not consider that AI technology will be among HIC processes (Simpson 2016 ). Transparency is another important concluding issue. It should be ensured for AI systems at different levels such as protecting social and cultural diversity, standardizing ideas, sharing negative results, and being honest by not allowing AI itself to resemble a real person. Transparency is important for ensuring social and cultural diversity in some fields because otherwise there may be outcomes which cause some unwanted results. For example, the conditions for maintaining health data in countries may differ, which means that various sources of the same kind of data may have different levels of accuracy. An AI system using such data with different accuracy levels is likely to produce inaccurate results which could be disastrous in the health profession. Moreover, as the data grows, accuracy level differences could lead to more serious false results, which is why diversity inclusion should be ensured only if transparency is ensured. Transparency is also an important issue in terms of trustworthiness. It must be clear to end users that an AI system is not a real intelligence. Users have the right to know whether they are interacting with a real or an artificial entity, especially while sharing their personal data. A transparent AI system increases users’ trust of AI systems (Lee et al. 2019 ). Thus, how and when data is collected by an AI system and how the personal data collected by the AI system will be stored should be open to users (Luxton et al. 2016 ). The relationship between transparency and understandability of AI systems is as critical as the relationship between respect for human autonomy and informed consent for human research (Felzman et al. 2019 ). Therefore, this level of transparency is crucial for the protection of autonomy of a person and reliability of the technology. Security has to be mentioned. The level of safety or the level of accuracy of an AI system is especially important. The issue of security is directly related to the necessity to not ignore differences in the accuracy level of data sources in order to preserve the diversity mentioned above under the transparency issue. A scoring system, such as 95% or 70% accurate AI, could be applied to address how the source data gathered and processed differ from each other in terms of projecting real life data. Furthermore, some of the ethics terminology used for AI are considered according to the guidelines. The first terminology, “ethics for design,” refers to the adaptation of ethical principles for researchers who are designing, using, and supervising AI technology. The second terminology, “ethics in design,” refers to strategies developed for process management/design in the implementation phase where AI technology interacts with social parameters. The third terminology, “ethics by design,” implies the integration of self-value-based decision-making capabilities into intelligent machines with AI technology (Dignum 2018 ). The first two terminologies, ethics for design and ethics in design, both highlight the idea that responsible AI requires a responsible person, that is, AI which is being developed within the scope of ethical values must be human controlled; consequently, these terminologies are associated with MDRDAI and EGTAI. On the other hand, the third terminology, ethics by design, implies that AI is a teammate which shares responsibility with people, hence this terminology can be associated with AAIP. Finally, it is necessary to address two additional subjects regarding the guidelines: content acquisition and balancing, and the enforcement power. The first of the final two important subjects is content acquisition and balancing, as well as specification. In general, the necessity of establishing a reflective equilibrium between ethical principles is not mentioned much and the assumptions about ethical dilemmas are not emphasized. It is not clear in any of the documents what content the generically written principles will be adapted to in specific cases and which principle will be spent in favor of the other in the case of a dilemma. Creating AI systems with a certain level of autonomy enables them to be in a position authorized to solve ethical dilemmas. In other words, an AI system, especially one dealing with personal data, must be familiar with solving ethical dilemmas, for example, where to sacrifice the principle of respect for autonomy for the principle to not harm; or any other possible ethical principle conflicts. Making these decisions is as important as writing the principles. Moreover, the specification issue is important in terms of the contribution of different fields of expertise to writing the documents. It can be seen that people with technical expertise, such as computer sciences and robotics, have more say in the documents. Since these documents are ethical guidelines for the development and use of AI technology, the voices of experts in technology ethics, philosophy, and sociology should be raised during their preparation. Last but not least, the second important subject to be addressed is the enforcement power of the documents. Techniques such as machine learning used in the development of AI technology are not framed from a value/principle-based ethical perspective but rather, developed within the framework of economic logic. Since fast results are the most important criteria to the business world which seeks profit, ethical evaluations are often ignored, and documents remain at the level of wishes, thus weakening the enforcement power of the ethics guidelines of AI. Actually, enforcement power would be ensured with the help of legal arrangements that prioritize these ethics guideline documents. For example, in all human studies, whether clinical or not, in order to eliminate suspicion of possible ethical breaches in the research, approval of an independent ethics review committee is mandatory according to the legal regulations. These regulations are based on the international ethical regulations for research involving human subjects or any kind of human subject data (CE Oviedo Convention, 1997; WMA Declaration of Helsinki, 1964). Similarly, in order to eliminate a possible breach in ethics of AI products, legal regulations underpinned by these three AI ethics documents would make ethical approval before entering the market mandatory. Actually, the fact that these documents are written from an economic benefit perspective rather than an ethical value perspective, and the perception that content acquisition and balancing will be made in favor of economic benefits instead of values, is a serious ethical problem in and of itself. A solution for such possible ethical problems arising from the documents could be through the revision process of the documents with the help of feedback. Certainly these documents are kept worthy by being alive and open for revision. Conclusion AI technology has found a solid place in our lives and there is no doubt that it will keep its place. Since this technology is seated at the core of daily life by the strong influence of its decision-making algorithms, ethical issues begin to gain in importance. This has resulted in several ethics guidelines being prepared in order to inform people about the ethical aspects of AI technology. In our analysis of the three main AI ethics guidelines, we encountered similar language with slightly different content relating to some of the principles. According to the categorization of the principles included in the documents these are human control, autonomy, transparency, security, utility, and equality; all three documents approached these aspects from a different point of view. Different levels of human control and different aspects of human autonomy, transparency, security, and equality issues are mentioned in the documents. The result of these different perspectives is that the documents have quite different future scenarios. What is common to all three documents are the issues of content acquisition and balancing, and enforcement of power. Since these documents are ethics guidelines for AI technology, there are no grounded suggestions for ethical dilemmas occurring in practical life; neither is a strategy for reflective equilibrium between ethical principles included in the documents. On the other hand, three of the guidelines are considered to be uninterested in addressing current or prospective ethical issues emerging from the existence of AI technology in medicine. Another important issue to be touched upon is the ambiguity of interlocutors for these documents. They are more likely to be informative documents to raise public awareness of AI and to guide AI users to be more conscious while using AI technology. Thus, the guiding statements of the documents for AI technology developers are more at an advisory level. Nonetheless, factors that could increase the impact envisaged in these documents are directly related with the cumulative degree of knowledge gained from AI R&D processes. The reality is that AI technology is data dependent, and to be able to transform into AGI would require an enormous amount of data. Gathering and processing this data will take a meaningful period of time and the perception of AI itself, as well as its ethical challenges and guidelines, will evolve during this time period. *This article is based on an oral presentation of the authors titled “A Critical Perspective on Guidelines for Responsible and Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence” and presented at the X. Turkey Bioethics Symposium: Advanced Technologies in Health and Ethics, October 17–18, 2019 in Istanbul. References Anyoha, R. Can Machines Think? 2017. https://sitn.hms.harvard.edu/flash/2017/history-artificial-intelligence/ . Accessed 24 November 2019. Artificial Intelligence. 2019. https://www.britannica.com/technology/artificial-intelligence . Accessed 24 November 2019. Bostrom, N. 2014. Forms of superintelligence . In Superintelligence: paths, dangers, strategies, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Google Scholar Chassignol, M., A. Khoroshavin, A. Klimova, and A. Bilyatdinova. 2018. Artificial intelligence trends in education: a narrative overview. Procedia Computer Science 136: 16–24. Article Google Scholar Chimuka, G. 2019. Impact of artificial intelligence on patent law. Towards a new analytical framework—[the Multi-Level Model]. World Patent Information 59: 101926. Article Google Scholar Council of Europa (CE). 1997. Oviedo Convention: Convention for the protection of human rights and dignity of the human being with regard to the application of biology and medicine: convention on human rights and biomedicine . https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list/-/conventions/treaty/164 . Accessed 2 November 2019. Dignum, V. 2018. Ethics in artificial intelligence introduction to the special issue. Ethics and Information Technology 20: 1–3. Article Google Scholar Dorado-Diaz, P.I., J. Sampedro-Gomez, V. Vicente-Palacios, and P.L. Sanchez. 2019. Applications of artificial intelligence in cardiology; the future is already here. Revista Espanola de Cardiologia . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rec.2019.05.014 . Article Google Scholar European Commission (EC). 2019. EGTAI: the ethics guidelines for trustworthy artificial intelligence. https://ec.europa.eu/futurium/en/ai-alliance-consultation . Accessed 30 September 2019. European Commission (EC). 2018. High Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence. A Definition of AI . https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/high-level-expert-group-artificial-intelligence . Accessed 25 November 2019. Felzman, H., E.F. Villaronga, C. Lutz, and A. Tamo-Larrieux. 2019. Transparency you can trust: transparency requirements for artificial intelligence between legal norms and contextual concerns. Big Data & Society . https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951719860542 . Article Google Scholar Future of Life : Benefits & Risks of Artificial Intelligence. 2016 . https://futureoflife.org/background/benefits-risks-of-artificial-intelligence/ . Accessed 24 November 2019. Future of Life. 2017a. A Principled AI Discussion in Asilomar. 2017a. https://futureoflife.org/2017/01/17/principled-ai-discussion-asilomar/ . Accessed 25 November 2019. Future of Life. 2017b. AAIP: Asilomar AI Principles. 2017b. https://futureoflife.org/ai-principles/ . Accessed 30 September 2019. Goering, S., and E. Yusta. 2016. On the necessity of ethical guidelines, for novel neurotechnologies. Cell 167: 882–885. Article Google Scholar Guan, J. 2019. Artificial intelligence in healthcare and medicine: promises, ethical challenges and governance. Chinese Medical Sciences Journal 34: 76–83. Google Scholar Haleem, A., D.M. Javaid, and I.H. Khan. 2019. Current status and applications of artificial intelligence (AI) in medical field: an overview. Current Medicine Research and Practice . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmrp.2019.11.005 . Article Google Scholar IEEE, Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems. 2019. Ethically aligned design. https://ethicsinaction.ieee.org/#read . Accessed 25 November 2019. Jiang, F., et al. 2017. Artificial intelligence in healthcare: past, present and future. Stroke and Vascular Neurology 2: 230–243. Article Google Scholar Jobin, A., M. Lenca, and E. Vayena. 2019. The global landscape of AI ethics guidelines. Nature Machine Intelligence 1: 389–399. Article Google Scholar Lee, Y., et al. 2019. Egoistic and altruistic motivation: how to induce users’ willingness to help for imperfect AI. Computers in Human Behavior 101: 180–196. Article Google Scholar Luxton, D.D., S.L. Anderson, and M. Anderson. 2016. Ethical issues and artificial intelligence technologies in behavioral and mental health care. Artificial Intelligence in Behavioral and Mental Health Care . https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-420248-1.00011-8 . Article Google Scholar Madannejada, R., et al. 2019. Toxicity of carbon-based nanomaterials: reviewing recent reports in medical and biological systems. Chemico-Biological Interactions 307: 206–222. Article Google Scholar Marcus, G., and E. Davis. 2019. Rebooting AI . New York: Pantheon. Google Scholar MDRDAI. 2018a. Co-construction approach and methodology . https://5dcfa4bd-f73a-4de5-94d8-c010ee777609.filesusr.com/ugd/ebc3a3_eb775ce43d3b46fe90c89da583e9744d.pdf Accessed 30 November 2019. MDRDAI. 2018b. Montréal declaration for a responsible development of artificial intelligence . https://www.montrealdeclaration-responsibleai.com/ Accessed 30 September 2019. Moor, J. 2006. The Dartmouth College artificial intelligence conference: the next fifty year. AI Magazine 27: 87–91. Google Scholar Patle, B.K., et al. 2018. A review: on path planning strategies for navigation of mobile robot. Defence Technology 15: 582–606. Article Google Scholar Say, C. 2018. Yapay Zekanın Doğuşu. 50 Soruda Yapay Zeka , p.83, Istanbul: 7 Renk Basın ve Yayın (in Turkish). Simpson, B. 2016. Algorithms or advocacy: does the legal profession have a future in a digital world? Information & Communication Technology Law 25 (1): 50–61. Article Google Scholar Tegmark, M. 2017. Matter turns intelligent, In Life 3.0 Being human in the age of artificial intelligence . New York: Alfred A. Knopf. Google Scholar Turing, Alan. 1950. Computing Machinery and Intelligence. Mind 59: 433–460. Article Google Scholar Wall, L.D. 2018. Some financial regulatory implications of artificial intelligence. Journal of Economics and Business 100: 55–63. Article Google Scholar World Medical Association (WMA). 1964. Declaration of Helsinki —Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects . https://www.wma.net/policies-post/wma-declaration-of-helsinki-ethical-principles-for-medical-research-involving-human-subjects/ . Accessed 2 November 2019. Download references Author information Authors and Affiliations Department of History of Medicine and Ethics, TOBB ETU University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey Banu Buruk & Perihan Elif Ekmekci Department of History of Medicine and Ethics, Ankara University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey Berna Arda Authors Banu Buruk View author publications Search author on: PubMed Google Scholar Perihan Elif Ekmekci View author publications Search author on: PubMed Google Scholar Berna Arda View author publications Search author on: PubMed Google Scholar Corresponding author Correspondence to Banu Buruk . Additional information Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Rights and permissions Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Buruk, B., Ekmekci, P.E. & Arda, B. A critical perspective on guidelines for responsible and trustworthy artificial intelligence. Med Health Care and Philos 23 , 387–399 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11019-020-09948-1 Download citation Published : 31 March 2020 Version of record : 31 March 2020 Issue date : September 2020 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1007/s11019-020-09948-1 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Keywords Artificial intelligence (AI) Ethics guidelines Ethical values Technology ethics Profiles Banu Buruk View author profile Advertisement