URL: https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs41746-023-00988-4

Generative AI and large language models in health care: pathways to implementation | npj Digital Medicine Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search My Account Login Content Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed Generative AI and large language models in health care: pathways to implementation Download PDF Download PDF Editorial Open access Published: 07 March 2024 Generative AI and large language models in health care: pathways to implementation Marium M. Raza ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-8050-9402 1 , Kaushik P. Venkatesh ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-1736-4367 1 & Joseph C. Kvedar ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-7517-2291 1 npj Digital Medicine volume 7 , Article number: 62 ( 2024 ) Cite this article 26k Accesses 87 Citations 31 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Health care economics Health policy Generative AI is designed to create new content from trained parameters. Learning from large amounts of data, many of these models aim to simulate human conversation. Generative AI is being applied to many different sectors. Within healthcare there has been innovation specifically towards generative AI models trained on electronic medical record data. A recent review characterizes these models, their strengths, and weaknesses. Inspired by that work, we present our evaluation checklist for generative AI models applied to electronic medical records. Introduction In November 2022, OpenAI launched ChatGPT, an artificial intelligence (AI) chatbot and search tool. ChatGPT is a tool that uses generative AI: AI that is designed to create or generate new content, such as text, images, or music from trained parameters 1 . Tools like ChatGPT use “large language models” (LLMs), multi-layer neural networks that are trained on large amounts of data to simulate human conversation 2 . Other LLM tools include Google’s Bard, Microsoft Bing, Chatsonic, Github Copilot, and ChatSonic to name just a few. LLMs themselves are an example of a “foundation model,” a broader term for an AI model trained on a large quantity of data at scale. The buzz around generative AI has skyrocketed, with ChatGPT expanding to have over 100 million users 3 . Over the past year, many have shown excitement for potential generative AI applications to healthcare. LLMs have already been used to pass the United States Medical Licensing Examination 4 , write research articles 5 , and interpret electronic medical record data 6 . This last use case is perhaps closest to the bedside. Generative AI models trained on EMR data, such as notes, lab values, and billing codes, hold the promise of better predictive performance, simpler model development (with less labeled data required) and cheaper model deployment 7 . At the same time, those critiquing the utility of these applications have argued that generative AI is simply another health-tech fad, with many roadblocks preventing its implementation 8 . One valid concern for example is regarding generative AI models ‘hallucinating,’ or inventing responses when they do not have sufficient information 9 . Evaluating generative AI models for EMRs In their review, Wornow et al. explore the current state of generative AI models for EMRs 7 . Specifically, Wornow et al. conducted a review of 84 foundation models trained on clinical structured text data from EMRs. This is the largest review of foundation models within health care to date. To define the key characteristics of the models, Wornow et al. make the distinction between (i) clinical language models, which intake, and output clinical text, and (ii) EMR models that intake a patient’s entire EMR to output a machine-understandable ‘representation’ for a patient, similar to a digital twin 10 . Wornow et al. found evidence that both types of models enable more accurate model predictions, but authors also found limitations. Currently, nearly all clinical text models are trained on either a single relatively small database or the entirety of PubMed. The ‘representation’ models are trained on small public datasets only or a single private healthcare system’s EMR. Thus, Wornow et al. found that current uses of generative AI within healthcare are limited by their lack of generalizability and issues of data privacy. Specifically, AI models based on data from different EMR systems are not generalizable, and very few AI models have had details, such as model weights, published due to data privacy concerns. Additionally, minimal work has been conducted to validate whether other, potentially more valuable benefits of FMs will be realized in healthcare (Table 1 ). Table 1 Generative AI model evaluation checklist Full size table Noting those limitations, Wornow et al. propose an improved framework to evaluate generative AI models for healthcare settings. They elaborate upon six criteria: predictive performance, data labeling, model deployment, emergent clinical applications, multimodality, and novel human-AI interfaces. By evaluating models around these criteria, Wornow et al. argue that health systems will be better able to judge which are best for more stratified clinical needs. Applying the Wornow et al. framework This work comes at a time when exciting new EMR LLMs are being launched. For example, in April Microsoft announced a partnership integrating its OpenAI service with the Epic EHR. This collaboration may involve using generative AI to auto-draft responses to common and/or time-intensive patient messages 11 . Oracle Cerner has also integrated generative AI into its EHR. Recently, (Nov 2023), Oracle Cerner announced the Oracle Clinical Digital Assistant tool, a multimodal voice and screen-based tool that will participate in appointments by automating notetaking and proposing actions such as medication orders, labs, and follow-up appointments. Providers should be able to talk to the tool to access elements of a patient’s EHR, while patients should be able to talk to the tool to book appointments and ask questions 12 . In deciding to implement either Epic or Oracle Cerner’s generative AI applications, Wornow et al.’s evaluation framework becomes important to assess each model’s true clinical value. Below is a checklist to be used while conducting a model evaluation, stemming from Wornow et al.’s six points. This type of checklist could be modified based on a specific generative AI model or clinical setting, and then could be used regularly for model evaluation. The pathway forward: leadership, incentives, and regulation The improved evaluation framework Wornow et al. propose is one important step forward. To truly make generative AI more than just a fad within healthcare, a broader pathway to implementation is required. This pathway must include defined leadership for development, adoption incentives, and continued regulation. Leadership will be required first and foremost to push continued model development, validation, and implementation. Currently, generative AI models have been developed by startup companies, research groups, as well as academic healthcare systems. Given these varied developers, guidance from a leadership body is needed to clarify the practical path towards implementation. Leadership should focus on developing guidelines for model performance (i.e. minimizing model hallucination), data sharing, finding the optimal healthcare settings for clinical trials using generative AI tools, as well as clarifying the needs of different healthcare settings (i.e. community vs. academic, private vs. public institutions). Ideally, this type of leadership will come from an organization involving physicians, healthcare administrators, developers, and investors. A sub-committee within the FDA could be well positioned to undertake such responsibility.ßß Alongside leadership, continued regulation will be required to balance the interests of developers, healthcare systems, payers, and patients. The continued evaluation of tools based on frameworks such as that developed by Wornow et al. must be conducted on the scale of individual health institutions so that tools with clinical relevance are prioritized. On the larger scale, as with other AI tools, policies surrounding liability, data privacy, and bias within predictive modeling must be clarified before insights from generative AI tools can be put into practice. While the FDA has begun to adapt its regulatory framework to address AI technology as medical devices it must move from discussion to action, and provide specific guidance for LLMs 13 , 14 . The FDA can learn from the strengths as well as the criticisms of the EU’s AI Act, one of the first formal regulations for generative AI 15 . Finally, as with any other healthcare technology, payer incentives must be present before widespread implementation. Generative AI tools will likely be considered a capital expense in the books of most providers and can follow along the same or similar financing path as EHR systems. Additionally, given that the cost to create and evaluate generative AI tools remains somewhat prohibitive, both private and public investment will be required to truly push the field forward. The time is now to capitalize on the excitement around generative AI and LLMs. The weakness of the generative AI space that Wornow et al. highlight, including those around model generalizability and evaluation, should be taken as guideposts for improvement. With leadership, incentivization, and regulation, generative AI within healthcare can be put on a feasible pathway for implementation. Data availability No datasets were produced or analyzed for this article. Code availability No computer code was produced or analyzed for this article. References Boscardin C. K., Gin B., Golde P. B. & Hauer K. E. ChatGPT and generative artificial intelligence for medical education: potential impact and opportunity. Acad Med https://doi.org/10.1097/ACM.0000000000005439 (2023). Alberts, IanL. et al. Large language models (LLM) and ChatGPT: what will the impact on nuclear medicine be? Eur. J. Nuclear Med. Mol. Imag. 50 , 1549–1552 (2023). Article Google Scholar Hu, K. ChatGPt sets record for fastest-growing user base. Reuters www.reuters.com/technology/chatgpt-sets-record-fastest-growing-user-base-analyst-note-2023-02-01/ (2023). Kung, T. H. et al. Performance of ChatGPT on USMLE: potential for AI-assisted medical education using large language models. PLoS Digit Health 2 , e0000198 (2023). Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Macdonald, C., Adeloye, D., Sheikh, A. & Rudan, I. Can ChatGPT draft a research article? An example of population-level vaccine effectiveness analysis. J. Glob. Health 13 , 01003 (2023). Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pang, C. et al. CEHR-BERT: Incorporating temporal information from structured EHR data to improve prediction tasks. arXiv https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2111.08585 (2021) Wornow, M. et al. The shaky foundations of large language models and foundation models for electronic health records. npj Digit. Med. 6 , 135 (2023). Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Duffourc, M. & Gerke, S. Generative Ai in health care and liability risks for physicians and safety concerns for patients. JAMA. 330 , 313–314, https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2023.9630 (2023). Article PubMed Google Scholar Weise K. & Metz C. When A.I. Chatbots Hallucinate. The New York Times . The New York Times Company https://www.nytimes.com/2023/05/01/business/ai-chatbots-hallucination.html (2023). Venkatesh, K. P., Raza, M. M. & Kvedar, J. C. Health digital twins as tools for precision medicine: Considerations for computation, implementation, and regulation. npj Digit. Med. 5 , 150 (2022). Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Microsoft News Center. Microsoft and epic expand strategic collaboration with integration of azure openai service. Microsoft News , Microsoft. news.microsoft.com/2023/04/17/microsoft-and-epic-expand-strategic-collaboration-with-integration-of-azure-openai-service/ (2023). Landi, H. Oracle Health integrates generative AI, voice tech into EHR system to automate medical note-taking. Fierce Healthcare . Questex LLC https://www.fiercehealthcare.com/ai-and-machine-learning/oracle-health-integrates-generative-ai-conversational-voice-tech-ehr-system (2023). FDA. Software as a Medical Device (SAMD): Clinical Evaluation . https://www.fda.gov/media/100714/download (2017). Meskó, B. & Topol, E. J. The imperative for regulatory oversight of large language models (or generative AI) in healthcare. npj Digit. Med. 6 , 120 (2023). Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar EU AI Act: first regulation on artificial intelligence. European Parliament . https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/society/20230601STO93804/eu-ai-act-first-regulation-on-artificial-intelligence (2023). Download references Author information Authors and Affiliations Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA Marium M. Raza, Kaushik P. Venkatesh & Joseph C. Kvedar Authors Marium M. Raza View author publications Search author on: PubMed Google Scholar Kaushik P. Venkatesh View author publications Search author on: PubMed Google Scholar Joseph C. Kvedar View author publications Search author on: PubMed Google Scholar Contributions First draft by M.M.R. Critical revisions by K.P.V. and J.C.K. All authors approved the final draft. Corresponding author Correspondence to Marium M. Raza . Ethics declarations Competing interests J.C.K. is the Editor-in-Chief of npj Digital Medicine . The other authors declare no competing interests. Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ . Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Raza, M.M., Venkatesh, K.P. & Kvedar, J.C. Generative AI and large language models in health care: pathways to implementation. npj Digit. Med. 7 , 62 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-023-00988-4 Download citation Received : 17 October 2023 Accepted : 06 December 2023 Published : 07 March 2024 Version of record : 07 March 2024 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-023-00988-4 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy . Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing