URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Technology

Portal:Technology - Wikipedia Jump to content Search Search Portal : Technology 80 languages Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية الدارجة Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Башҡортса Boarisch Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Беларуская Български বাংলা Bosanski Basa Ugi Català Нохчийн Cebuano کوردی Deutsch Zazaki ދިވެހިބަސް Ελληνικά Esperanto Español Eesti فارسی Suomi Français Frysk Hausa עברית हिन्दी Kreyòl ayisyen Magyar Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 ქართული Gĩkũyũ Қазақша 한국어 Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Македонски Монгол Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ नेपाली Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Polski پښتو Português ရခိုင် Română Русский سنڌي Taclḥit တႆး සිංහල Seeltersk Svenska தமிழ் ᥖᥭᥰ ᥖᥬᥲ ᥑᥨᥒᥰ Тоҷикӣ Tolışi Türkçe Татарча / tatarça Українська Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Tiếng Việt Wolof ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí 粵語 中文 IsiZulu Edit links From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Wikipedia portal Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software . Learn how to update the maintenance information here . Portal topics - ( Random portal ) Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology The Technology Portal The wheel , invented sometime before the 4th millennium BC, is one of the most ubiquitous and important technologies. This detail of the "Standard of Ur", c. 2500 BCE., displays a Sumerian chariot Shortcut P:TECH P:TECH Technology is the application of conceptual knowledge to achieve practical goals, especially in a reproducible way. The word technology can also mean the products resulting from such efforts, including both tangible tools such as utensils or machines , and intangible ones such as software . Technology plays a critical role in science , engineering , and everyday life . Technological advancements have led to significant changes in society. The earliest known technology is the stone tool , used during prehistory , followed by the control of fire —which in turn contributed to the growth of the human brain and the development of language during the Ice Age , according to the cooking hypothesis . The invention of the wheel in the Bronze Age allowed greater travel and the creation of more complex machines. More recent technological inventions, including the printing press , telephone, and the Internet , have lowered barriers to communication and ushered in the knowledge economy . ( Full article... ) Outline of technology Refresh with new selections below (purge) Recognized articles - load new batch Entries here consist of Good and Featured articles, which meet a core set of high editorial standards. Image 1 State Route 527 ( SR 527 , also known as the Bothell–Everett Highway ) is a state highway in Snohomish County , Washington. It travels 9 miles (14 km) from north to south, connecting the northern Seattle suburbs of Bothell , Mill Creek , and Everett . The highway intersects Interstate 405 (I-405) at its southern terminus, SR 96 in northern Mill Creek, and I-5 at an interchange with SR 99 and SR 526 in Everett. The Bothell–Everett Highway was built in the 1910s as part of the intercity Pacific Highway and briefly formed part of U.S. Route 99 (US 99) in 1926. The following year, US 99 was moved west to a new highway that would later become modern-day SR 99. The old route to the east was signed by the state as Secondary State Highway 2A (SSH 2A) from 1937 to 1943 and SSH 2J from 1957 to 1964, when it was renumbered as SR 527. ( Full article... ) Image 2 Monocrystalline solar cell The Clean Tech Revolution: The Next Big Growth and Investment Opportunity is a 2007 book by Ron Pernick and Clint Wilder , who say that commercializing clean technologies is a profitable enterprise that is moving steadily into mainstream business. As the world economy faces challenges from energy price spikes, resource shortages , global environmental problems , and security threats , clean technologies are seen to be the next engine of economic growth . Pernick and Wilder highlight eight major clean technology sectors: solar power , wind power , biofuels , green buildings , personal transportation , the smart grid , mobile applications, and water filtration . Six major forces, which they call the six C's, are pushing clean technology into the mainstream: costs, capital, competition, China, consumers, and climate. Very large corporations such as GE , Toyota and Sharp , and investment firms such as Goldman Sachs are making multibillion-dollar investments in clean technology. ( Full article... ) Image 3 The Boys in Red accident occurred on January 12, 2008, outside the city of Bathurst, New Brunswick , Canada . A semi-trailer truck and a van carrying the basketball team from Bathurst High School collided, which killed seven students and the wife of the coach, and injured four other occupants in the van. It was the deadliest transportation accident in New Brunswick since 1989, when a logging truck tipped onto a hayride in Cormier Village , killing 13. It was the deadliest bus accident involving a sports team in Canada until the Humboldt Broncos bus crash in April 2018. The accident was followed by a national day of mourning in Canada, and a suspension on all 15-passenger van type vehicles being used for student transport in New Brunswick. Two investigations, one by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) and the other by Transport Canada , concluded that "poor weather and a slippery road surface" were major contributing factors in the crash while driver error and "poor mechanical condition of the E350 resulting from inadequate vehicle maintenance" appeared to be a major contributing factors in the crash. Pressure from the public and victims' families prompted the chief coroner of the province to launch an inquiry, which produced recommendations to improve student transport safety in New Brunswick. The provincial government agreed with the majority of the suggestions and has since enacted many of them. ( Full article... ) Image 4 United States Geological Survey map depicting the location of Groom Mine Groom Mine , located in Lincoln County, Nevada , first opened in the 1870s. Most mining in the area, mostly of silver chloride ores, had finished by 1874. Groom Mine continued to operate, finally ceasing operations in 1954. By 1956, official recordings of products of the Groom Mining District, which includes Groom Mine, shows that lead was the bulk of minerals harvested, which also included 145,000 troy ounces (4,500 kg) of silver and about 45 troy ounces (1.4 kg) of gold . During World War II , Groom Mine became surrounded by military activity, which continued into the 21st century. In the 1950s, the mine was exposed to fallout from nuclear testing that was being carried out at the Nevada Test Site . During the late 20th century, military activities, including the destruction of a mill and the restriction of access to the mine, continued to affect work there. The United States Government seized the mine under eminent domain from its previous owners in 2015. Just compensation was set at $1.204 million by the United States District Court, District of Nevada (Las Vegas), Judge Miranda Du presiding. ( Full article... ) Image 5 Ethiopian Airlines ( Amharic : የኢትዮጵያ አየር መንገድ , romanized : Ye-Ītyōṗṗyā āyer menged ), formerly Ethiopian Air Lines ( EAL ), is the flag carrier of Ethiopia , and is wholly owned by the country's government . EAL was founded on 21 December 1945 and commenced operations on 8 April 1946, expanding to international flights in 1951. The firm became a share company in 1965 and changed its name from Ethiopian Air Lines to Ethiopian Airlines. The airline has been a member of the International Air Transport Association since 1959 and of the African Airlines Association (AFRAA) since 1968. Ethiopian is a Star Alliance member, having joined in December 2011. The company slogan is 'The New Spirit of Africa.' Ethiopian's hub and headquarters are at Bole International Airport in Addis Ababa , from where it serves a network of 155 passenger destinations—22 of them domestic—and 68 freighter destinations. The airline has secondary hubs in Togo and Malawi . Ethiopian Airlines is Africa's largest airline in terms of passengers carried, destinations served, fleet size, and revenue. Ethiopian Airlines is also the world's fourth-largest airline by the number of countries served. Ethiopian Airlines is a subsidiary of the Ethiopian Airlines Group, which is wholly owned by Ethiopian Investment Holdings , the sovereign wealth fund of Ethiopia. ( Full article... ) Image 6 PokerTracker Software, LLC is a poker tool software company that produces the PokerTracker line of poker tracking and analysis software . PokerTracker's software imports and parses the hand histories that poker sites create during online play and stores the resulting statistics/information about historical play into a local database library for self-analysis, and for in-game opponent analysis using a real-time Head-up display . The software allows the user to monitor each poker session's profit or loss, hands played, time played, and table style. It calculates and graphs statistics such as hands per hour, winnings per hand, winnings per hour, cumulative profit and loss, and individual game profit and loss across multiple currencies. ( Full article... ) Image 7 James Gayley in Buffalo, New York , c. 1910 SS James Gayley was an American lake freighter in service between 1902 and 1912. She was built by the American Ship Building Company in Cleveland, Ohio , for the Cleveland Steamship Company. Upon the end of her maiden voyage on 27 May 1902, James Gayley became the inaugural vessel to utilise the automatic Hulett unloading rigs in Conneaut, Ohio , to discharge her cargo of iron ore loaded in Two Harbors, Minnesota . She hauled ore, coal and grain, and is known to have been involved in two accidents prior to her loss. On 6 August 1912, at 12:00 ( EST ), James Gayley passed through the Soo Locks into Lake Superior with a cargo of coal she had loaded in Buffalo, New York , four days earlier, bound for Duluth, Minnesota . She was under the command of Captain Millard M. Stewart. A thick fog shrouded the lake, greatly restricting visibility. Early on the following day, while about 43 miles (69.2 km) east of Manitou Island , she was struck on her starboard side, aft of her collision bulkhead by the ore-laden freighter Rensselaer . As James Gayley began to sink rapidly, her crew and passengers were taken aboard Rensselaer , and were later transferred to the freighter Stadacona . James Gayley sank in between 16 and 20 minutes, while Rensselaer survived the collision, albeit with a severely damaged bow. In the aftermath of the accident, both the captain of Rensselaer and the first mate of James Gayley had their licenses suspended. ( Full article... ) More recognized articles Selected picture Image 1 Brusio spiral viaduct Photo: David Gubler The Bernina Express passing over the Brusio spiral viaduct . Located near Brusio , Graubünden , Switzerland, the single track nine-arched stone spiral railway viaduct was opened in 1908. It is part of the World Heritage -listed Bernina railway . More selected pictures Image 2 Nice tramway Photograph: Myrabella The Nice tramway crossing Place Garibaldi , Nice , where it lowers its pantograph and is powered by batteries. This 8.7-kilometre (5.4 mi), single-line tramway is operated by Veolia Transdev . It opened on 24 November 2007, replacing bus lines 1, 2, 5 and 18. More selected pictures Image 3 MS Majesty of the Seas Photo credit: UpstateNYer MS Majesty of the Seas is a Sovereign class cruise ship owned and operated by Royal Caribbean International , a cruise line based in Miami, Florida . Her sister ship MS Sovereign of the Seas was the largest cruise ship in the world at the time of its completion in 1988. More selected pictures Image 4 Escalator Credit: Stig Nygaard An escalator is a moving staircase for carrying people between floors of a building. The device consists of a motor -driven chain of individual, linked steps that move up or down on tracks, allowing the step treads to remain horizontal. '"`UNIQ--templatestyles-00000026-QINU`"' More selected pictures Image 5 Tugboat Image credit: Al2 / Lycaon / Jeff Dahl A diagram showing the parts of a tugboat , a boat used to maneuver large ships in harbours , over the open sea, or through rivers and canals . They also tow barges , disabled ships, and oil rigs . Equipped with powerful engines producing thousands of horsepower, extensive rigging equipment, and a fender of tires for protection, tugboats can push or tow large vessels with high precision and speed. More selected pictures Image 6 Commodore 64 Photo: Evan Amos The Commodore 64 is an 8-bit home computer introduced in 1982 by Commodore International . Its low retail price and easy availability led to the system becoming the market leader for three years. It remains the best-selling single personal computer model of all time. More selected pictures Image 7 George Washington Carver Photograph credit: Unknown; restored by Adam Cuerden George Washington Carver (1860s–1943) was an American agricultural scientist and inventor. Born into slavery in Diamond, Missouri , he was raised by his master Moses Carver after being emancipated, having been separated from his parents as an infant during a kidnapping incident. After college, Carver became a professor at Tuskegee Institute , where he developed techniques to improve soils depleted by repeated plantings of cotton. He wanted poor farmers to grow alternative crops, such as peanuts and sweet potatoes, as a source of their own food and to improve their quality of life. Carver spent years developing and promoting products made from peanuts, although none became commercially successful. Apart from his work to improve the lives of farmers, he was also a leader in promoting environmentalism . Carver received numerous honors for his work, including the NAACP 's Spingarn Medal . In an era of very high racial polarization, his fame reached beyond the black community; he was widely recognized and praised in the white community for his many achievements and talents. In 1941, Time magazine dubbed Carver a "black Leonardo ". This picture of Carver was taken around 1910 and is in the collection of the Tuskegee University archives. More selected pictures Image 8 TRS connector Image credit: Søren Peo Pedersen Two TRS connectors (also known as jack plugs or phone plugs ), a common audio connector . They are cylindrical in shape, with two or more contacts. Originally invented for use in telephone switchboards , jack plugs are still widely used, both in the original ¼-inch (6.3 mm) size and in miniaturized versions. The top plug in this image is for stereo connections, while the bottom is for mono . More selected pictures Image 9 Mars rovers Photograph: NASA Two Jet Propulsion Laboratory engineers stand with three vehicles, providing a size comparison of three generations of Mars rovers . Front and center is the flight spare for the first Mars rover, Sojourner , which landed on Mars in 1997 as part of the Mars Pathfinder Project. On the left is a Mars Exploration Rover test vehicle, a working sibling to Spirit and Opportunity , which landed on Mars in 2004. On the right is a test rover for the Mars Science Laboratory, which landed Curiosity on Mars in 2012. More selected pictures Image 10 Overhead power line Credit: Simon Koopmann An overhead power line is a structure used in electric power transmission and distribution to transmit electrical energy along large distances. It consists of one or more conductors suspended by towers or utility poles . '"`UNIQ--templatestyles-00000020-QINU`"' More selected pictures Image 11 Mazda RX-8 Photo credit: Fir0002 The Mazda RX-8 sports car is a front mid-engine, rear-wheel drive four-seat coupé manufactured by Mazda Motor Corporation . It is the successor to the RX-7 and, like its predecessors in the RX range, it is powered by a rotary engine . The RX-8 began North American sales in the 2004 model year. More selected pictures Image 12 Semi-submersible Photo: Agência Brasil The semi-submersible oil platform P-51, operated by Brazilian energy company Petrobras , being positioned by tugboats . Semisubs sit on pontoons located under the ocean surface, with the operating deck atop columns, above the sea level. In this manner, they are relatively protected from wave action. More selected pictures Image 13 Kitty Joyner Photograph: NACA Kitty Joyner (1916–1993) was an American electrical engineer with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), and then the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). She was hired in 1939 as the organization's first woman engineer, shortly after she had become the first woman to graduate from the University of Virginia 's engineering program. More selected pictures Image 14 Wheel Credit: fir0002 A wheel is a circular component that is intended to rotate on an axial bearing . The wheel is one of the main components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines . '"`UNIQ--templatestyles-00000022-QINU`"' More selected pictures Image 15 Rail transport Photograph: David Gubler Rail transport is a means of conveyance of passengers and goods by way of wheeled vehicles running on rail tracks. The oldest, man-hauled railways date to the 6th century B.C.; the method grew more popular after the introduction of steam locomotives in the 19th century. Here we can see four BNSF GE C44-9W diesel locomotives hauling a mixed freight train along the Columbia River in the US. More selected pictures Image 16 Bucket-wheel excavators Photograph: Raimond Spekking Bucket-wheel excavators (BWEs) are heavy equipment used in surface mining . The primary function of a BWE is to act as a continuous digging machine in large-scale open pit mining operations. These BWEs were photographed at the Garzweiler surface mine in Germany. More selected pictures Image 17 Telephone Credit: Berthold Werner A telephone , or phone , is a telecommunications device that converts sound , typically the human voice , into electronic signals suitable for transmission via cables or other transmission media over long distances through satellite. '"`UNIQ--templatestyles-0000001E-QINU`"' More selected pictures Image 18 Laptop computer Credit: Mike McGregor The OLPC XO-1 is an inexpensive subnotebook laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries. '"`UNIQ--templatestyles-00000024-QINU`"' More selected pictures Image 19 John Herschel Photograph: Julia Margaret Cameron ; restoration: Adam Cuerden John Herschel was an English mathematician, astronomer, chemist, inventor, and experimental photographer. He named seven moons of Saturn and four moons of Uranus , invented the cyanotype and actinometer , and wrote extensively on topics including meteorology, physical geography and the telescope. More selected pictures Image 20 SOCATA TBM Photograph credit: Michael Mainiero The SOCATA TBM (now Daher TBM) is a family of high-performance single-engine turboprop business and utility light aircraft manufactured by Daher . This SOCATA TBM 900 was photographed in flight during the 2015 EAA AirVenture Oshkosh airshow in the U.S. state of Wisconsin. The aircraft features a Pratt & Whitney Canada PT6A-64 engine, and a five-blade carbon-fiber propeller, which increases performance and decreases cabin noise. In a passenger configuration, the pressurized cabin is typically fitted with highly finished interiors, featuring luxury materials such as leather and wood veneers. More selected pictures Main topics v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool / Equipment Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Stonemasonry Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Seaplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear Power Weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterials Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Cosmetics Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Display device Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Particle accelerator Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Outline Portal General images - load new batch The following are images from various technology-related articles on Wikipedia. Image 1 NASA Fuel cell stack Direct-methanol cell (from Emerging technologies ) Image 2 Top 30 AI patent applicants in 2016 (from Emerging technologies ) Image 3 A late Bronze Age sword or dagger blade (from History of technology ) Image 4 Eric M. C. Tigerstedt (1887–1925) was known as a pioneer of sound-on-film technology. Tigerstedt in 1915. (from Invention ) Image 5 Thomas Edison with his second phonograph , photographed by Levin Corbin Handy in Washington, April 1878 (from History of technology ) Image 6 Clock from Salisbury Cathedral , ca. 1386 (from History of technology ) Image 7 An axehead made of iron, dating from the Swedish Iron Age (from History of technology ) Image 8 Self-replicating 3D printer (from Emerging technologies ) Image 9 'BUILD YOUR OWN TELEVISION RECEIVER.' Science and Invention magazine cover, November 1928 (from Invention ) Image 10 Edison electric light bulbs 1879–80 (from History of technology ) Image 11 Agriculture preceded writing in the history of technology. (from History of technology ) Image 12 Solid-state air batteries Li-Air composition (from Emerging technologies ) Image 13 Design for a flying machine (c.1488) by da Vinci (from History of technology ) Image 14 Johannes Gutenberg 's printing press was voted the most important invention of the second millennium. (from Invention ) Image 15 Alessandro Volta with the first electrical battery . Volta is recognized as an influential inventor. (from Invention ) Image 16 Dome of Florence Cathedral (from History of technology ) Image 17 Ford assembly line, 1913. The magneto assembly line was the first. (from History of technology ) Image 18 A rare 1884 photo showing the experimental recording of voice patterns by a photographic process at the Alexander Graham Bell Laboratory in Washington, D.C. Many of their experimental designs panned out in failure. (from Invention ) Image 19 A water-powered mine hoist used for raising ore, ca. 1556 (from History of technology ) Image 20 Pont du Gard in France, a Roman aqueduct (from History of technology ) Image 21 The compartmented water wheel , here its overshot version (from History of technology ) Image 22 Walls at Sacsayhuaman (from History of technology ) Image 23 Newcomen steam engine for pumping mines (from History of technology ) Image 24 3D printer (from Emerging technologies ) Image 25 A variety of stone tools (from History of technology ) Image 26 The wheel, invented sometime before the 4th millennium BC, is one of the most ubiquitous and important technologies. This detail of the " Standard of Ur ", c. 2500 BCE., displays a Sumerian chariot . (from History of technology ) Image 27 The preserved Rocket (from History of technology ) Did you know (auto-generated) - load new batch ... that the Illinois Institute of Technology Academic Campus has been ranked as both one of the US's most significant architectural works and its least beautiful college campus? ... that Flathead Lake Biological Station can detect invasive aquatic species in real-time using eDNA technology? ... that Byrnihat was ranked by an air technology company as the world's most polluted city in 2024? ... that Zirconic was a U.S. government effort to create reconnaissance satellites equipped with stealth technology? ... that Kathanar – The Wild Sorcerer is being shot on a custom-built studio spanning 45,000 square feet (4,200 m 2 ), utilizing the virtual production technology? ... that scholars have described the 1946 book The Failure of Technology as a precursor to the environmental movement? ... that astrophysicist Alan C. Cummings has led more than 1,700 weekly birdwatching walks at Caltech since 1986? ... that Justin Yu , the current Classic Tetris World Champion , is also a cellist in MIT 's video game orchestra? Top 10 WikiProject Technology popular articles of the month Image 1 ChatGPT is a generative artificial intelligence chatbot developed by OpenAI . It was released in November 2022. It uses large language models —specifically generative pre-trained transformers (GPTs)—to generate text, speech, and images in response to user prompts . It is credited with accelerating the AI boom , an ongoing period marked by rapid investment and public attention toward the field of artificial intelligence (AI). OpenAI operates the service on a freemium model . Users can interact with ChatGPT through text, audio, and image prompts . ( Full article... ) Image 2 YouTube search results, May 2025 YouTube is an American online video sharing platform owned by Google . YouTube was founded on February 14, 2005, by Chad Hurley , Jawed Karim , and Steve Chen who were all former employees of PayPal . Headquartered in San Bruno , California , it is the second-most-visited website in the world, after Google itself. In January 2024, YouTube had reached more than 2.7 billion monthly active users , who collectively watched more than one billion hours of video every day. As of May 2019 [update] , videos were being uploaded to the platform at a rate of more than 500 hours of video per minute, and as of mid-2024 [update] , there were approximately 14.8 billion videos in total. ( Full article... ) Image 3 Facebook is an American social networking service owned by the American technology conglomerate Meta Platforms . It was founded in 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg , along with his Harvard College roommates and fellow students Eduardo Saverin , Andrew McCollum , Dustin Moskovitz , and Chris Hughes . The name Facebook derives from the face book directories often given to American university students. ( Full article... ) Image 4 Google's headquarters, the Googleplex Google LLC ( / ˈ ɡ uː . ɡ əl / ⓘ , GOO -gəl ) is an American multinational technology corporation focused on information technology , online advertising , search engine technology, email , cloud computing , software, quantum computing , e-commerce , consumer electronics, and artificial intelligence (AI). It has been referred to as "the most powerful company in the world" by the BBC , and is one of the world's most valuable brands . Google's parent company Alphabet Inc. has been described as a Big Tech company. ( Full article... ) Image 5 Musk in 2025 Elon Reeve Musk ( / ˈ iː l ɒ n / EE -lon ; born June 28, 1971) is a businessman and entrepreneur known for his leadership of Tesla , SpaceX , X , and xAI . Musk has been the wealthiest person in the world since 2025; as of April 2026, [update] Forbes estimates his net worth to be US$809 billion. ( Full article... ) Image 6 OpenClaw (formerly Clawdbot , Moltbot , and Molty ) is a free and open-source autonomous artificial intelligence agent that can execute tasks via large language models (LLMs), using messaging platforms as its main user interface. ( Full article... ) Image 7 Anthropic PBC is an American artificial intelligence (AI) company headquartered in San Francisco . It has developed a range of large language models (LLMs) named Claude and focuses on AI safety . ( Full article... ) Image 8 A QR code for the URL of the English Wikipedia Mobile main page A QR code , short for quick-response code , is a type of two-dimensional matrix barcode invented in 1994 by Masahiro Hara of the Japanese company Denso Wave for labelling automobile parts. It features white and black squares within a square grid featuring fiducial markers on the corners, readable by imaging devices like cameras, and processed using Reed–Solomon error correction until the image can be appropriately interpreted. The required data is then extracted from patterns that are present in both the horizontal and the vertical components of the QR image. ( Full article... ) Image 9 Artificial intelligence ( AI ) is the capability of computational systems to perform tasks typically associated with human intelligence , such as learning , reasoning , problem-solving , perception , and decision-making . It is a field of research in engineering , mathematics and computer science that develops and studies methods and software that enable machines to perceive their environment and use learning and intelligence to take actions that maximize their chances of achieving defined goals. ( Full article... ) Image 10 Claude is a series of large language models developed by Anthropic and first released in 2023. Since Claude 3, each generation has typically been released in three sizes, from least to most capable: Haiku, Sonnet, and Opus. An additional model named Claude Mythos was released to some companies in 2026 but not to the public. ( Full article... ) Categories Category puzzle Select [►] to view subcategories Technology Technology by country Technology by period Technology by type Technology writers Science and technology Outlines of technology and applied science Technology in society People associated with technology People in technology Works about technology Artificial objects Inventions Technical applications Technological change Technical communication Technological comparisons Computing Technological controversies De-extinction Technology development Technology evangelism Glossaries of technology History of technology Hypothetical technology Killing devices Kilns Science and technology ministries Mobile technology Obsolete technologies Technology organizations Pejorative terms related to technology Philosophy of technology Real-time technology Sociology of technology Technology systems Tech hubs Technical specifications Technological management Technology-related lists Technology assessment Technology education Technology hazards Technology stubs News ' April 23, 2026 – Japan 's Nikkei 225 stock market index surpasses 60,000 points for the first time in a historic high, while South Korea 's KOSPI also reaches a record high amid gains in technology shares . (AFP via Channels TV) (Nikkei Asia) April 14, 2026 – Reactions to the 2026 Iran war , Israel–Italy relations Italian prime minister Giorgia Meloni announces that Italy is suspending the automatic renewal of an agreement with Israel on exchanging military equipment and technology "in view of the current situation." (Al Jazeera) April 14, 2026 – Norway–Ukraine relations The Norwegian government announces that Ukraine will produce drones in the country as part of a bilateral defence cooperation agreement. Norway will support the production of Ukrainian drones, while Ukraine will share data, information and knowledge of the technology with Norway. (Reuters) April 9, 2026 – North Korea and weapons of mass destruction The Korean Central News Agency reports that North Korea has tested various military technologies throughout the week, including a surface-to-surface tactical ballistic missile identified as Hwasongpho-11 Ka . (Yonhap News Agency) April 6, 2026 – Middle Eastern crisis The mosque and filling station at the Sharif University of Technology in Tehran , Iran, are damaged in an airstrike, causing a gas outage in the neighbourhood. (Al Jazeera) March 24, 2026 – AI boom American technology company OpenAI says it will shut down its Sora app . (NBC News) Related portals Agriculture Astronomy Aviation Computer programming Electronics Energy Engineering Film Geography Mathematics Medicine Nuclear technology Radio Renewable energy Science Spaceflight Telecom Telephones Television Trains Transport Video games WikiProjects Parent project Technology Related projects Architecture Computing Computer Science Engineering Electronics Energy development Energy History of Science Metalworking Skyscrapers Telecommunications Video games Woodworking Things you can do Check the recent changes page for improvements, other changes, and vandalism to these articles Article requests : Computer science, computing, and Internet topics • Engineering topics • Technology and tools topics Deletion discussions : Listed at Wikipedia:WikiProject Deletion sorting/Technology Expand stub articles: stub categories Electronics • Engineer • Optics • Robotics • Telecommunications • Wireless Notability : Articles with notability concerns, listed at WikiProject Notability Requested pictures : Technology topics, requested pictures Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Commons Free media repository Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Discover Wikipedia using portals List of all portals The arts portal Biography portal Current events portal Geography portal History portal Mathematics portal Science portal Society portal Technology portal Random portal WikiProject Portals Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Portal:Technology&oldid=1236676832 " Categories : All portals Technology portals Technology Technology portal Science portals Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Pages including recorded pronunciations Wikipedia semi-protected portals Portals with triaged subpages from November 2018 All portals with triaged subpages Portals with no named maintainer Automated article-slideshow portals with over 1000 articles in article list Automated article-slideshow portals with 501–1000 articles in article list Search Search Portal : Technology 80 languages Add topic