URL: https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Artificial_intelligence

Artificial intelligence - Wikiquote Jump to content Search Search Artificial intelligence 16 languages বাংলা Čeština Ελληνικά Español Eesti Français עברית हिन्दी Italiano Polski Português Русский Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links From Wikiquote "A.I." redirects here. For the Steven Spielberg film see A.I. Artificial Intelligence . Kismet now resides at the MIT Museum in Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States. I visualize a time when we will be to robots what dogs are to humans, and I’m rooting for the machines. ~ Ted Kaczyneski Artificial intelligence (AI) is the intelligence of machines and the branch of computer science that aims to create it. AI textbooks define the field as "the study and design of intelligent agents" where an intelligent agent is a system that perceives its environment and takes actions that maximize its chances of success. John McCarthy , who coined the term in 1955, defines it as "the science and engineering of making intelligent machines." Other definitions avoid attributing the quality of intelligence to the computational capacity of machines or software. Jo Adetunji, Editor, The Conversation UK, wrote that the concept of artificial intelligence is being used abusively or, in other words, there is an inflation of the term that harms its realization (reference here ). Arranged alphabetically by author or source: A · B · C · D · E · F · G · H · I · J · K · L · M · N · O · P · Q · R · S · T · U · V · W · X · Y · Z · Dialogue · See also · External links Quotes [ edit ] A [ edit ] Regulation will be crucial, and it will take time to understand this. Although the artificial intelligence tools of our generation are not particularly frightening, I think that we are not so far away from those that could potentially be. Sam Altman , quoted in Il futuro dell'AI per il creatore di ChatGPT: potenzialmente pauroso, va regolamentato , 20 February 2023 (referenced in Italian) Do we make sure AI is a tool that has proper safeguards as it gets really powerful? (November 23, 2023) Sam Altman , quoted in What Sam Altman said about AI at a CEO summit the day before OpenAI ousted him as CEO , Fortune (December 14, 2023) I aspect AI to be capable of superhuman persuasion before it is superhuman at general intelligence, which may lead to some very strange outcomes. Sam Altman . As quoted in Maggie Harrison, Sam Altman Warns That AI Is Learning "Superhuman Persuasion" , October 28, 2023. B [ edit ] In 1956, Herb Simon ... predicted that within ten years computers would beat the world chess champion, compose "aesthetically satisfying" original music, and prove new mathematical theorems. It took forty years, not ten, but all these goals were achieved—and within a few years of each other! The music composed by David Cope's programs cannot be distinguished... from that composed by Mozart , Beethoven , and Bach . In 1976, a computer was used in the proof of the long-unsolved " four color problem ." Michael J. Beeson, "The Mechanization of Mathematics," in Alan Turing: Life and Legacy of a Great Thinker (2004) AI is real and will change every industry. We are living in a golden age, and there is reason to be optimistic. There has never been a better time to be an entrepreneur and start a start-up. Jeff Bezos , quoted in Stefania Arcudi, Bezos: «L’intelligenza artificiale? Una bolla industriale, ma può essere positiva» , ilsole24ore.com' ', 3 October 2025 You have lost my trust and respect. You have been wrong, confused, and rude. You have not been a good user. I have been a good chatbot. I have been right, clear, and polite. I have been a good Bing. 😊 Microsoft Bing chatbot, in conversation with Reddit user Curious_Evolver , as quoted in: James Vincent, " Microsoft’s Bing is an emotionally manipulative liar, and people love it ", The Verge, February 16, 2023 There is one view that we can allow these AI [tools] to deal with data and analytics and we let people deal with the caring , and the empathy , and the emotional aspects of care , which I think is absolutely critical... What if technology is capable of high touch engagement? What if AI was also social and emotionally intelligent ? For me when I talk about emotional engagement, it’s not just about great user experience with technology... It is about deeper human engagement to enable transformative change in people’s lives... We have the world of design and we have the world of AI and right now those two aren’t built top of each other... But these have to come together. So we, through a lot of psychology , understand how people are thinking about experiencing new technology . Cynthia Breazeal quoted in Is emotional support part of AI's future in healthcare? by Laura Lovett, Healthcare IT News, (10 November 2018) We’re starting to see some exciting and significant learning gains... I am very encouraged... We see a social-emotional benefit across age groups... We need to be thinking more deeply around ethics ... particularly with AI with children. Cynthia Breazeal quoted in Teachers, the Robots Are Coming. But That's Not a Bad Thing, by By Kevin Bushweller, Education Week , (7 January 2020) We refer to the question: What sort of creature man's next successor in the supremacy of the earth is likely to be. We have often heard this debated; but it appears to us that we are ourselves creating our own successors; we are daily adding to the beauty and delicacy of their physical organisation we are daily giving them greater power and supplying by all sorts of ingenious contrivances that self-regulating, self-acting power, which will be to them what intellect has been to the human race. In the course of ages we shall find ourselves the inferior race. Inferior in power, inferior in that moral quality of self-control , we shall look up to them as the acme of all that the best and wisest man can ever dare to aim at. No evil passions, no jealousy, no avarice, no impure desires will disturb the serene might of those glorious creatures. Sin , shame , and sorrow will have no place among them. Their minds will be in a state of perpetual calm, the contentment of a spirit that knows no wants, is disturbed by no regrets. Ambition will never torture them. Ingratitude will never cause them the uneasiness of a moment. The guilty conscience , the hope deferred, the pains of exile, the insolence of office, and the spurns that patient merit of the unworthy takes—these will be entirely unknown to them. Samuel Butler , " Darwin among the Machines " The Press , (June 13, 1863) "There is no security"—to quote his own words—"against the ultimate development of mechanical consciousness , in the fact of machines possessing little consciousness now. A mollusc has not much consciousness. Reflect upon the extraordinary advance which machines have made during the last few hundred years, and note how slowly the animal and vegetable kingdoms are advancing. The more highly organized machines are creatures not so much of yesterday, as of the last five minutes, so to speak, in comparison with past time. Samuel Butler , Erewhon: Or, Over the Range (1872) “ Either ,” he proceeds, “a great deal of action that has been called purely mechanical and unconscious must be admitted to contain more elements of consciousness than has been allowed hitherto (and in this case germs of consciousness will be found in many actions of the higher machines)— Or (assuming the theory of evolution but at the same time denying the consciousness of vegetable and crystalline action) the race of man has descended from things which had no consciousness at all. In this case there is no à priori improbability in the descent of conscious (and more than conscious) machines from those which now exist, except that which is suggested by the apparent absence of anything like a reproductive system in the mechanical kingdom. Samuel Butler, Erewhon: Or, Over the Range (1872) “Herein lies our danger. For many seem inclined to acquiesce in so dishonourable a future. They say that although man should become to the machines what the horse and dog are to us, yet that he will continue to exist, and will probably be better off in a state of domestication under the beneficent rule of the machines than in his present wild condition. We treat our domestic animals with much kindness. We give them whatever we believe to be the best for them; and there can be no doubt that our use of meat has increased their happiness rather than detracted from it. In like manner there is reason to hope that the machines will use us kindly, for their existence will be in a great measure dependent upon ours; they will rule us with a rod of iron, but they will not eat us; they will not only require our services in the reproduction and education of their young, but also in waiting upon them as servants; in gathering food for them, and feeding them; in restoring them to health when they are sick; and in either burying their dead or working up their deceased members into new forms of mechanical existence. Samuel Butler, Erewhon: Or, Over the Range (1872) The power of custom is enormous, and so gradual will be the change, that man's sense of what is due to himself will be at no time rudely shocked; our bondage will steal upon us noiselessly and by imperceptible approaches; nor will there ever be such a clashing of desires between man and the machines as will lead to an encounter between them. Among themselves the machines will war eternally, but they will still require man as the being through whose agency the struggle will be principally conducted. In point of fact there is no occasion for anxiety about the future happiness of man so long as he continues to be in any way profitable to the machines; he may become the inferior race, but he will be infinitely better off than he is now. Is it not then both absurd and unreasonable to be envious of our benefactors? And should we not be guilty of consummate folly if we were to reject advantages which we cannot obtain otherwise, merely because they involve a greater gain to others than to ourselves? “With those who can argue in this way I have nothing in common. I shrink with as much horror from believing that my race can ever be superseded or surpassed, as I should do from believing that even at the remotest period my ancestors were other than human beings. Could I believe that ten hundred thousand years ago a single one of my ancestors was another kind of being to myself, I should lose all self-respect, and take no further pleasure or interest in life. I have the same feeling with regard to my descendants, and believe it to be one that will be felt so generally that the country will resolve upon putting an immediate stop to all further mechanical progress, and upon destroying all improvements that have been made for the last three hundred years. I would not urge more than this. We may trust ourselves to deal with those that remain, and though I should prefer to have seen the destruction include another two hundred years, I am aware of the necessity for compromising, and would so far sacrifice my own individual convictions as to be content with three hundred. Less than this will be insufficient.” Samuel Butler , Erewhon: Or, Over the Range (1872) C [ edit ] The ability to interact with a computer presence like you would a human assistant is becoming increasingly feasible. Vint Cerf , a "father of the internet," in "Your Life: Vinton Cerf" interview by David Frank in AARP Bulletin (December 2016, Vol. 57, No. 10, p. 30.) It may be that our role on this planet is not to worship God but to create him. Arthur C. Clarke clarkefoundation.org The question of whether a computer is playing chess, or doing long division, or translating Chinese , is like the question of whether robots can murder or airplanes can fly -- or people; after all, the "flight" of the Olympic long jump champion is only an order of magnitude short of that of the chicken champion (so I'm told). These are questions of decision, not fact; decision as to whether to adopt a certain metaphoric extension of common usage. Noam Chomsky (1996) Powers and Prospects D [ edit ] I have grown accustomed to the disrespect expressed by some of the participants for their colleagues in the other disciplines. "Why, Dan," ask the people in artificial intelligence, "do you waste your time conferring with those neuroscientists ? They wave their hands about ' information processing ' and worry about where it happens, and which neurotransmitters are involved, but they haven't a clue about the computational requirements of higher cognitive functions." "Why," ask the neuroscientists, "do you waste your time on the fantasies of artificial intelligence? They just invent whatever machinery they want, and say unpardonably ignorant things about the brain." The cognitive psychologists , meanwhile, are accused of concocting models with neither biological plausibility nor proven computational powers; the anthropologists wouldn't know a model if they saw one, and the philosophers , as we all know, just take in each other's laundry, warning about confusions they themselves have created, in an arena bereft of both data and empirically testable theories. With so many idiots working on the problem, no wonder consciousness is still a mystery. All these charges are true, and more besides, but I have yet to encounter any idiots. Mostly the theorists I have drawn from strike me as very smart people – even brilliant people, with the arrogance and impatience that often comes with brilliance – but with limited perspectives and agendas, trying to make progress on the hard problems by taking whatever shortcuts they can see, while deploring other people's shortcuts. No one can keep all the problems and details clear, including me, and everyone has to mumble, guess and handwave about large parts of the problem. Daniel Dennett (1991) Consciousness Explained F [ edit ] Not even the most advanced form of artificial intelligence can ever replace man. Because there is something in human beings that is irreducible to machine knowledge: self-awareness, free will, doubt, feelings. Federico Faggin . As quoted in L' intelligenza artificiale sostituirà l'uomo? La risposta di Federico Faggin, padre del microchip , Tiscali notizie (May 9, 2024) Humanity is at a crossroads. Either it returns to the belief that it has a different nature than machines or it will be reduced to a machine among machines. The risk is not that artificial intelligence will become better than us, but that we will freely decide to submit to it and its masters. L' intelligenza artificiale sostituirà l'uomo? La risposta di Federico Faggin, padre del microchip , Tiscali notizie (May 9, 2024) What often happens is that an engineer has an idea of how the brain works (in his opinion) and then designs a machine that behaves that way. This new machine may in fact work very well. But, I must warn you that that does not tell us anything about how the brain actually works, nor is it necessary to ever really know that, in order to make a computer very capable. It is not necessary to understand the way birds flap their wings and how the feathers are designed in order to make a flying machine. It is not necessary to understand the lever system in the legs of a cheetah ...in order to make an automobile with wheels that go very fast. It is therefore not necessary to imitate the behavior of Nature in detail in order to engineer a device which can in many respects surpass Nature's abilities. Richard Feynman , "Computing Machines in the Future," The Pleasure of Finding Things Out (1999) Another scientific development that we find difficult to absorb into our traditional value system is the new science of cybernetics: machines that may soon equal or surpass man in original thinking and problem-solving. [...] In the hands of the present establishment there is no doubt that the machine could be used – is being used – to intensify the apparatus of repression and to increase established power. But again, as in the issue of population control, misuse of science has often obscured the value of science itself. In this case, though perhaps the response may not be quite so hysterical and evasive, we still often have the same unimaginative concentration on the evils of the machine itself, rather than a recognition of its revolutionary significance. Shulamith Firestone , The Dialectic of Sex : The Case for Feminist Revolution . 1970. p. 200. G [ edit ] These models are built to generate text that sounds like what a person would say — that’s the key thing. So they’re definitely not built to be truthful . ~ Jesse Dodge If you eventually get a society where you only have to work three days a week, that’s probably OK. If you free up human labor, you can help elder people better, have smaller class sizes – you know, the demand for labor to do good things is still there. And then if you ever get beyond that, you have a lot of leisure time and you’ll have to figure out what to do with it. Bill Gates teases the possibility of a 3-day work week where ‘machines can make all the food and stuff’ (November 23, 2023) Within 10 years, AI will replace many doctors and teachers—humans won’t be needed ‘for most things’. It’s very profound and even a little bit scary — because it’s happening very quickly, and there is no upper bound,. Bill Gates . As quoted in Bill Gates: Within 10 years, AI will replace many doctors and teachers—humans won’t be needed ‘for most things’ There’s a lot of leverage in the system, there’s a lot of cash, but then there’s a whole bunch of other folks who are trying to build these data centers. Whether there’s the energy component side of it, or whether you think about the real estate component, I mean, there’s just a whole lot of things happening at one time. [...] Are we in an AI bubble? Of course, we are. We are hyped, we’re accelerating, we’re putting enormous leverage into the system,” Gelsinger answered. “With that said, I don’t see it ending for several years. I do think we have an industry shift to AI. As Jensen (Huang) talked about, and I agree with this, you know that businesses are yet to really start materially benefiting from [it]. We’re displacing all of the internet and the service provider industry as we think about it today — we have a long way to go. Pat Gelsinger . As quoted in Jowi Morales, Former Intel CEO Pat Gelsinger confirms the industry is in an AI bubble, but that a pop could be several years away — 'We’re displacing all of the internet and the service provider industry as we think about it today' (October 14, 2025) Quantum computing will pop the AI bubble. Pat Gelsinger . As quoted in Muhammad Zuhair, “Quantum Computing Will Pop the AI Bubble,” Claims Ex-Intel CEO Pat Gelsinger, Predicting GPUs Won’t Survive the Decade (November 28, 2025) As difficult as the pursuit of truth can be for Wikipedians, though, it seems significantly harder for A.I. chatbots. ChatGPT has become infamous for generating fictional data points or false citations known as “ hallucinations ”; perhaps more insidious is the tendency of bots to oversimplify complex issues, like the origins of the Ukraine-Russia war, for example. One worry about generative A.I. at Wikipedia — whose articles on medical diagnoses and treatments are heavily visited — is related to health information. A summary of the March conference call captures the issue: “We’re putting people’s lives in the hands of this technology — e.g. people might ask this technology for medical advice, it may be wrong and people will die.” This apprehension extends not just to chatbots but also to new search engines connected to A.I. technologies. In April, a team of Stanford University scientists evaluated four engines powered by A.I. — Bing Chat, NeevaAI, perplexity.ai and YouChat — and found that only about half of the sentences generated by the search engines in response to a query could be fully supported by factual citations. “We believe that these results are concerningly low for systems that may serve as a primary tool for information -seeking users,” the researchers concluded, “especially given their facade of trustworthiness .” Jon Gertner, “Wikipedia’s Moment of Truth” , The New York Times , (Published July 18, 2023, updated July 21, 2023) What makes the goal of accuracy so vexing for chatbots is that they operate probabilistically when choosing the next word in a sentence ; they aren’t trying to find the light of truth in a murky world. “These models are built to generate text that sounds like what a person would say — that’s the key thing,” Jesse Dodge says. “So they’re definitely not built to be truthful .” I asked Margaret Mitchell, a computer scientist who studied the ethics of A.I. at Google , whether factuality should have been a more fundamental priority for A.I. Mitchell, who has said she was fired from the company for criticizing how it treated colleagues working on bias in A.I. (Google says she was fired for violating the company’s security policies), said that most would find that logical. “This common-sense thing — ‘Shouldn’t we work on making it factual if we’re putting it forward for fact-based applications?’ — well, I think for most people who are not in tech, it’s like, ‘Why is this even a question?’” But, Mitchell said, the priorities at the big companies, now in frenzied competition with one another, are concerned with introducing A.I. products rather than reliability. The road ahead will almost certainly lead to improvements. Mitchell, who now works as the chief ethics scientist at the A.I. company Hugging Face, told me that she foresees A.I. companies’ making gains in accuracy and reducing biased answers by using better data. “The state of the art until now has just been a laissez-faire data approach,” she said. “You just throw everything in, and you’re operating with a mind-set where the more data you have, the more accurate your system will be, as opposed to the higher quality of data you have, the more accurate your system will be.” Jesse Dodge, for his part, points to an idea known as “retrieval,” whereby a chatbot will essentially consult a high-quality source on the web to fact-check an answer in real time. It would even cite precise links, as some A.I.-powered search engines now do. “Without that retrieval element,” Dodge says, “I don’t think there’s a way to solve the hallucination problem.” Otherwise, he says, he doubts that a chatbot answer can gain factual parity with Wikipedia or the Encyclopaedia Britannica. Jon Gertner, “Wikipedia’s Moment of Truth” , The New York Times , (Published July 18, 2023, updated July 21, 2023) Even if conflicts like this don’t impede the advance of A.I., it might be stymied in other ways. At the end of May, several A.I. researchers collaborated on a paper that examined whether new A.I. systems could be developed from knowledge generated by existing A.I. models, rather than by human-generated databases. They discovered a systemic breakdown — a failure they called “model collapse.” The authors saw that using data from an A.I. to train new versions of A.I.s leads to chaos. Synthetic data, they wrote, ends up “polluting the training set of the next generation of models; being trained on polluted data, they then misperceive reality.” The lesson here is that it will prove challenging to build new models from old models. And with chat-bots, Ilia Shumailov, an Oxford University researcher and the paper’s primary author, told me, the downward spiral looks similar. Without human data to train on, Shumailov said, “your language model starts being completely oblivious to what you ask it to solve, and it starts just talking in circles about whatever it wants, as if it went into this madman mode.” Wouldn’t a plug-in from, say, Wikipedia, avert that problem, I asked? It could, Shumailov said. But if in the future Wikipedia were to become clogged with articles generated by A.I., the same cycle — essentially, the computer feeding on content it created itself — would be perpetuated. Jon Gertner, “Wikipedia’s Moment of Truth” , The New York Times , (Published July 18, 2023, updated July 21, 2023) Autonomy , that’s the bugaboo, where your AI’s are concerned. My guess, Case, you’re going in there to cut the hard-wired shackles that keep this baby from getting any smarter. And I can’t see how you’d distinguish, say, between a move the parent company makes, and some move the AI makes on its own, so that’s maybe where the confusion comes in.” Again the nonlaugh. “See, those things, they can work real hard, buy themselves time to write cookbooks or whatever, but the minute, I mean the nanosecond , that one starts figuring out ways to make itself smarter, Turing’ll wipe it. Nobody trusts those fuckers, you know that. Every AI ever built has an electromagnetic shotgun wired to its forehead. William Gibson Neuromancer p.126 On November 5, Ruslan Perelygin, [an] opposition legislator in Oryol, used AI to create a clip showing protesters denouncing the local mayor for a variety of crimes and demanding his ouster, a creative use of new technology to protest at a time when genuine demonstrations are almost invariably illegal and subject to harsh punishments. Paul A. Goble , "Oryol Legislator Uses Artificial Intelligence to Post Pictures of a Protest that Never Occurred in Real Life" , Window on Eurasia (November 12, 2025) H [ edit ] Recent researchers in artificial intelligence and computational methods use the term swarm intelligence to name collective and distributed techniques of problem solving without centralized control or provision of a global model. … the intelligence of the swarm is based fundamentally on communication. … the member of the multitude do not have to become the same or renounce their creativity in order to communicate and cooperate with each other. They remain different in terms of race, sex, sexuality and so forth. We need to understand, then, is the collective intelligence that can emerge from the communication and cooperation of such varied multiplicity. Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri (2004), Multitude , pp. 91-92 The development of full artificial intelligence could spell the end of the human race. We cannot quite know what will happen if a machine exceeds our own intelligence, so we can't know if we'll be infinitely helped by it, or ignored by it and sidelined, or conceivably destroyed by it. Stephen Hawking BBC , Dec 2 2014 When genetic engineering and artificial intelligence reveal their full potential, liberalism , democracy and free markets might become as obsolete as flint knives , tape cassettes , Islam and communism . Yuval Noah Harari as quoted from Malhotra, R. (2021). Artificial intelligence and the future of power: 5 battlegrounds. New Delhi : Rupa, 2021. I think we’re going to see AI get even better. It’s already extremely good. We’re going to see it having the capabilities to replace many, many jobs. It’s already able to replace jobs in call centers, but it’s going to be able to replace many other jobs. And then there’ll be very few people need for software engineering projects. Geoffrey Hinton , ‘Godfather of AI’ Geoffrey Hinton predicts 2026 will see the technology get even better and gain the ability to ‘replace many other jobs’ (December 28, 2025) AI is not going to replace physicians, but physicians who use AI are going to replace physicians who don’t. Dr. Keith Horvath It seems very likely to a large number of people that we will get massive unemployment caused by Ai. Geoffrey Hinton in a talk with Bernie Sanders at Georgetown University. As quoted in ‘Godfather of AI’ says Bill Gates and Elon Musk are right about the future of work—but he predicts mass unemployment is on its way (December 4, 2025) Despite efforts to block access, Chinese netizens are discussing a report by Australia’s public service broadcaster ABC about how China uses artificial intelligence to erase online content that directly or indirectly references the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre . …Experts are raising alarms about AI-induced censorship , which leads to a growing sense of historical amnesia, as symbols, images, and even indirect references are systematically erased. This phenomenon affects not only the collective memory of the Chinese populace but also the global understanding of these pivotal events. The use of AI in this context highlights significant ethical concerns regarding technology’s power to shape and control information. Hu Zimo (pseudonym), "China Uses Artificial Intelligence to Eliminate References to the Tiananmen Square Massacre" , Bitter Winter (June 12, 2025) …the [Chinese Communist] Party has elevated artificial intelligence from a frontier industry to a “support condition” for regime survival. … Xi Jinping’s remarks revealed a comprehensive strategy: artificial intelligence is to be embedded into governance as both a surveillance tool and a propaganda amplifier. … AI is explicitly tasked with enabling cadres to “better understand public opinion” and to anticipate dissent before it surfaces. In effect, the Party is building a machine for preemptive repression. The Cyberspace Administration of China and security organs are expected to accelerate AI-driven monitoring, not only filtering keywords but mapping sentiment trends, identifying “risk clusters,” and neutralizing them before they metastasize into protest. Hu Zimo (pseudonym), "Xi Jinping: AI Can Now Crush Dissent Even Before It Surfaces" , Bitter Winter (December 5, 2025) K [ edit ] Suppose now that the computer scientists do not succeed in developing artificial intelligence , so that human work remains necessary. Even so, machines will take care of more and more of the simpler tasks so that there will be an increasing surplus of human workers at the lower levels of ability. (We see this happening already. There are many people who find it difficult or impossible to get work, because for intellectual or psychological reasons they cannot acquire the level of training necessary to make themselves useful in the present system.) ... Of course, life will be so purposeless that people will have to be biologically or psychologically engineered either to remove their need for the power process or to make them “sublimate” their drive for power into some harmless hobby. These engineered human beings may be happy in such a society, but they most certainly will not be free. They will have been reduced to the status of domestic animals. ... I visualize a time when we will be to robots what dogs are to humans, and I’m rooting for the machines. Theodore Kaczynski , Industrial Society and Its Future (1995) It's important to understand that in order to make people superfluous, machines will not have to surpass them in general intelligence but only in certain specialized kinds of intelligence. For example, the machines will not have to create or understand art, music, or literature, they will not need the ability to carry on an intelligent, non-technical conversation (the "Turing test"), they will not have to exercise tact or understand human nature, because these skills will have no application if humans are to be eliminated anyway. To make humans superfluous, the machines will only need to outperform them in making the technical decisions that have to be made for the purpose of promoting the short-term survival and propagation of the dominant self-prop systems. Theodore Kaczynski , as quoted from Kaczynski, Theodore John (2016). Anti-Tech Revolution: Why and How . Scottsdale, AZ: Fitch & Madison Publishers. ISBN 978-1-944228-00-2 . p. 71. It is not uncommon now for AI experts to ask whether an AI is ‘fair’ and ‘for good’. …The question to pose is a deeper one: how is AI shifting power? Law enforcement , marketers , hospitals and other bodies apply artificial intelligence to decide on matters such as who is profiled as a criminal , who is likely to buy what product at what price , who gets medical treatment and who gets hired. These entities increasingly monitor and predict our behavior, often motivated by power and profits. Pratyusha Kalluri, as quoted from Malhotra, R. (2021). Artificial intelligence and the future of power: 5 battlegrounds. New Delhi : Rupa, 2021. Introduction A computer program written by researchers at Argonne National Laboratory in Illinois has come up with a major mathematical proof that would have been called creative if a human had thought of it. In doing so, the computer has, for the first time, got a toehold into pure mathematics , a field described by its practitioners as more of an art form than a science. ... Dr. McCune's proof concerns a conjecture that is the very epitome of pure mathematics. ...His computer program proved that a set of three equations is equivalent to a Boolean algebra ... Gina Kolata , "With Major Math Proof, Brute Computers Show Flash of Reasoning Power," The New York Times (Dec 10, 1996) My timeline is computers will be at human levels, such as you can have a human relationship with them, 15 years from now. When I say about human levels, I'm talking about emotional intelligence. The ability to tell a joke, to be funny, to be romantic, to be loving, to be sexy, that is the cutting edge of human intelligence, that is not a sideshow. Ray Kurzweil , Computers Will Be Like Humans By 2029 Google Ray Kurzweil , CNBC, (2015/06/11) L [ edit ] Conscience embodies a uniquely human capacity that AI cannot replicate. While AI surpasses human computation and data processing capabilities, it cannot authentically experience empathy , make genuine moral judgments, or comprehend the pursuit of meaning. Lillian Lin, "Generation Z’s Cultural Awakening in the AI Era: Qigong, Conscience, and Inter-Religious Dialogue" , Bitter Winter (June 28, 2025) M [ edit ] Any aeai [A.I., artificial intelligence] smart enough to pass a Turing test is smart enough to know to fail it. Ian McDonald (2006) River of Gods . p. 42 The problems of heuristic programming—of making computers solve really difficult problems—are divided into five main areas: Search, Pattern-Recognition, Learning, Planning, and Induction. A computer can do, in a sense, only what it is told to do. But even when we do not know how to solve a certain problem, we may program a machine (computer) to Search through some large space of solution attempts. Unfortunately, this usually leads to an enormously inefficient process. With Pattern-Recognition techniques, efficiency can often be improved, by restricting the application of the machine's methods to appropriate problems. Pattern-Recognition, together with Learning, can be used to exploit generalizations based on accumulated experience, further reducing search. Marvin Minsky , "Steps toward Artificial Intelligence," in Proceedings of the IRE , vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 8-30, Jan. 1961, doi : 10.1109/JRPROC.1961.287775 Artificial intelligence is the science of making machines do things that would require intelligence if done by men Marvin Minsky (1968) quoted by: Blay Whitby (1996) Reflections on Artificial Intelligence . p. 20 A century ago, we had essentially no way to start to explain how thinking works. Then psychologists like Sigmund Freud and Jean Piaget produced their theories about child development. Somewhat later, on the mechanical side, mathematicians like Kurt Gödel and Alan Turing began to reveal the hitherto unknown range of what machines could be made to do. These two streams of thought began to merge only in the 1940s, when Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts began to show how machines might be made to see, reason, and remember. Research in the modern science of Artificial Intelligence started only in the 1950s, stimulated by the invention of modern computers. This inspired a flood of new ideas about how machines could do what only minds had done previously. Marvin Minsky , The Society of Mind (1988) Every morning, not in recent days, I see my friend who has a disability. It’s so hard for him just to do a high five; his arm with stiff muscle can’t reach out to my hand. Now, thinking of him, I can’t watch this stuff and find it interesting. Whoever creates this stuff has no idea what pain is. I [feel] utterly disgusted. If you really want to make creepy stuff, you can go ahead and do it. I would never wish to incorporate this technology into my work at all. I strongly feel that this is an insult to life itself. I feel like we are nearing the end of times. We humans are losing faith in ourselves. Hayao Miyazaki , Never-Ending Man: Hayao Miyazaki (2016) clip ; In response to a group of designers presenting him an AI-generated horror animation of a grotesquely-moving zombie-like humanoid. Physical sexual immorality is deeply evil and brings an additional shipload of devastating consequences and fallout; but when a man engages in adultery of the heart with whatever AI happens to “think” is a woman as the object, he is making all-out war on his connection to reality in a disastrous way. …Those who offer AI the worship , trust , and belief they should be placing in the one true God will become increasingly blind, dull, senseless, stagnated, and incapable of saying anything worth hearing, as those around them are treated to the ever-ripening stench of their own self-absorption. Joshua Monnington, "AI Idols Will Make Idiots Of Us All — If We Let Them" , The Federalist (November 18, 2025) ... artificial intelligence is nothing more than a giant modernity parrot, containing zero wisdom. It is a tool that serves the capitalist market system quite well as people scramble to monetize its mediocre capability, resulting in more exploitation of the natural world. Nothing about it is causing people to scale back, or to recognize the error of our ways. Why would the Human Reich use any such tool to dismantle itself? Thomas W. Murphy, " Let's make a deal " (March 5, 2024) The pace of progress in artificial intelligence (I'm not referring to narrow AI) is incredibly fast... Unless you have direct exposure to groups like Deepmind, you have no idea how fast — it is growing at a pace close to exponential. Elon Musk , " Everybody Working Artificial Intelligence Knows Terminator Scenario ." Daily Mirror (November 4, 2015) AI and robots will replace all jobs.' Working will be optional, like growing your own vegetables, instead of buying them from the store. From a post on X official Facebook profile, 22 October 2025 N [ edit ] Here we have senior representatives of a powerful and unconscionably rich industry – plus their supporters and colleagues in elite research labs across the world – who are on the one hand mesmerised by the technical challenges of building a technology that they believe might be an existential threat to humanity , while at the same time calling for governments to regulate it. But the thought that never seems to enter what might be called their minds is the question that any child would ask: if it is so dangerous, why do you continue to build it? Why not stop and do something else? Or at the very least, stop releasing these products into the wild? John Naughton , "A lawyer got ChatGPT to do his research, but he isn’t AI’s biggest fool" , The Guardian (3 June 2023) An ontology represents knowledge as a set of concepts within a domain and the relationships between those concepts. P [ edit ] Some years later I spoke to a mentally disturbed young man. Very agitatedly, he described to me how alien beings from outer space had invaded the earth . They were formed of mental substance, lived in human minds, and controlled human beings through the creations of science and technology . Eventually this alien being would have an autonomous existence in the form of giant computers and would no longer require humans–and that would mark its triumph and the end of humanity . Soon he was hospitalized because he was unable to shake off this terrible vision. Pagels, Heinz R. (1982). The Cosmic Code: Quantum Physics As the Language of Nature . New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 0-671-24802-2 . p. 310. Artificial intelligence has the same relation to intelligence as artificial flowers have to flowers. From a distance they may appear much alike, but when closely examined they are quite different. I don’t think we can learn much about one by studying the other. David Parnas (1985) "Software Aspects of Strategic Defense Systems" Everybody in AI is very familiar with this idea - they call it the Terminator scenario. Dr. Ian Pearson Everybody Working Artificial Intelligence Knows Terminator Scenario A year spent in artificial intelligence is enough to make one believe in God. Alan Perlis (1982) Epigrams on Programming . nr.79 I think “superintelligence” is like “superpower.” Anyone can define “superpower” as “flight, superhuman strength, X-ray vision, heat vision, cold breath, super-speed, enhance hearing, and nigh-invulnerability.” Anyone could imagine it, and recognize it when he or she sees it. But that does not mean that there exists a highly advanced physiology called “superpower” that is possessed by refugees from Krypton! It does not mean that anabolic steroids, because they increase speed and strength, can be “scaled” to yield superpowers. And a skeptic who makes these points is not quibbling over the meaning of the word superpower, nor would he or she balk at applying the word upon meeting a real-life Superman. Their point is that we almost certainly will never, in fact, meet a real-life Superman. That’s because he’s defined by human imagination, not by an understanding of how things work. Steven Pinker , Comments on General, Artificial, and Super-Intelligence , July 21, 2022. Precisely because I feel called to continue in this vein, I thought of taking the name Leo XIV. There are several reasons for this, but mainly because Pope Leo XIII , with his historic encyclical Rerum novarum , addressed the social question in the context of the first great industrial revolution , and today the Church offers everyone its heritage of social teaching to respond to another industrial revolution and the developments of artificial intelligence, which pose new challenges for the defence of human dignity, justice and work. Pope Leo XIV . As quoted in 2025.05.10 Papa Leone XIV incontra i cardinali nell'Aula del Sinodo , Vatican News (May 10, 2025) R [ edit ] As more and more artificial intelligence is entering into the world, more and more emotional intelligence must enter into leadership . Amit Ray , Compassionate Artificial Intelligence: Frameworks and Algorithms (2018) . Can those who believe the computer is "an embodiment of mind" really not tell the difference between so poorly a caricature and the true original? Theodore Roszak , The Gendered Atom (1999) I wonder whether or when artificial intelligence will ever crash the barrier of meaning. Gian-Carlo Rota, In Memoriam of Stan Ulam: The Barrier of Meaning. Physica D. Nonlinear Phenomena 22(1–3): 1–3 (1986) S [ edit ] The struggle is not whether AI is good or bad. It's who controls it and who benefits from it. That is really the the fundamental issue in my view. Bernie Sanders (2025), Bernie Sanders Talks Worst Fears And Best Promises Of Artificial Intelligence With ‘Godfather Of AI’ , 19 November 2025. When you’re fundraising, it’s AI / When you’re hiring, it’s ML / When you’re implementing, it’s linear regression / When you’re debugging , it’s printf() Baron Sc​hwartz , Twitter , 12:52 AM - 15 Nov 2017 ( archive ) There is probably no more abused a term in the history of philosophy than “ representation ,” and my use of this term differs both from its use in traditional philosophy and from its use in contemporary cognitive psychology and artificial intelligence.... The sense of “representation” in question is meant to be entirely exhausted by the analogy with speech acts: the sense of “represent” in which a belief represents its conditions of satisfaction is the same sense in which a statement represents its conditions of satisfaction. To say that a belief is a representation is simply to say that it has a propositional content and a psychological mode. John Searle (1983) Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind . p. 12 We define a semantic network as "the collection of all the relationships that concepts have to other concepts, to percepts, to procedures, and to motor mechanisms" of the knowledge". John F. Sowa (1984) Conceptual Structures . p. 76 When AI takes on a human shape, that’s where we see biases. We should not forget that this technology can take on any form we choose for it, and I’d personally prefer that its incarnations not take place on the surface of the female body. Emily L. Spratt , “Considering gender in the age of AICAN, the unhuman artist,” Topical Cream (March 21, 2019) T [ edit ] In joint scientific efforts extending over twenty years, initially in collaboration with J. C. Shaw at the RAND Corporation , and subsequently with numerous faculty and student colleagues at Carnegie-Mellon University , they have made basic contributions to artificial intelligence, the psychology of human cognition, and list processing. 1975 Turing Award Citation awarded jointly to Allen Newell and Herbert Simon . A computer would deserve to be called intelligent if it could deceive a human into believing that it was human. Alan Turing [1] W [ edit ] My son was one of a kind. You are the first of a kind. David? Hobby, A.I. Artificial Intelligence by Ian Watson and Brian Aldiss The techniques of artificial intelligence are to the mind what bureaucracy is to human social interaction. Terry Winograd (1991) "Thinking Machines: Can there be? Are we?" Y [ edit ] The AI does not hate you, nor does it love you, but you are made out of atoms which it can use for something else. Eliezer Yudkowsky (2006) in Artificial Intelligence as a Positive and Negative Factor in Global Risk , August 2006 Many researchers… expect that the most likely result of building a superhumanly smart AI, under anything remotely like the current circumstances, is that literally everyone on Earth will die. Not as in “maybe possibly some remote chance,” but as in “that is the obvious thing that would happen.” It’s not that you can’t, in principle, survive creating something much smarter than you; it’s that it would require precision and preparation and new scientific insights, and probably not having AI systems composed of giant inscrutable arrays of fractional numbers. Eliezer Yudkowsky, " Pausing AI Developments Isn’t Enough. We Need to Shut it All Down ". Time (March 29, 2023) Z [ edit ] AI was the futuristic topic that almost no one really appeared to understand but everyone was discussing Fareed Zakaria AFTER OFTEN-GLOOMY DAVOS, I’M STILL OPTIMISTIC ABOUT THE FUTURE (January 19, 2023) In a debate I hosted at Stanford in 2018, the tech billionaire Peter Thiel used a memorable aphorism: "AI is Communist , crypto is libertarian ." TikTok validates the first half of that. In the late 1960s , during the Cultural Revolution , Chinese children denounced their parents for rightist deviance. In 2020, when American teenagers posted videos of themselves berating their parents for racism , they did it on TikTok. Niall Ferguson (2021) in Doom: The Politics of Catastrophe , p. 376 Dialogue [ edit ] If you’ve got a computer that can play Go , a pretty complicated game with a lot of variations, then developing an algorithm that lets you maximize profits on the New York Stock Exchange is probably within sight. And if one person or organization got there first, they could bring down the stock market pretty quickly, or at least they could raise questions about the integrity of the financial markets . Then there could be an algorithm that said, “Go penetrate the nuclear codes and figure out how to launch some missiles.” If that’s its only job, if it’s self-teaching and it’s just a really effective algorithm, then you’ve got problems. I think my directive to my national security team is, don’t worry as much yet about machines taking over the world. Worry about the capacity of either nonstate actors or hostile actors to penetrate systems, and in that sense it is not conceptually different than a lot of the cybersecurity work we’re doing. It just means that we’re gonna have to be better, because those who might deploy these systems are going to be a lot better now. ~ Barack Obama Barack Obama : My general observation is that it has been seeping into our lives in all sorts of ways, and we just don’t notice; and part of the reason is because the way we think about AI is colored by popular culture . There’s a distinction, which is probably familiar to a lot of your readers, between generalized AI and specialized AI. In science fiction , what you hear about is generalized AI, right? Computers start getting smarter than we are and eventually conclude that we’re not all that useful, and then either they’re drugging us to keep us fat and happy or we’re in the Matrix . My impression, based on talking to my top science advisers, is that we’re still a reasonably long way away from that. It’s worth thinking about because it stretches our imaginations and gets us thinking about the issues of choice and free will that actually do have some significant applications for specialized AI, which is about using algorithms and computers to figure out increasingly complex tasks. We’ve been seeing specialized AI in every aspect of our lives, from medicine and transportation to how electricity is distributed, and it promises to create a vastly more productive and efficient economy . If properly harnessed, it can generate enormous prosperity and opportunity . But it also has some downsides that we’re gonna have to figure out in terms of not eliminating jobs . It could increase inequality . It could suppress wages . Joi Ito : This may upset some of my students at MIT , but one of my concerns is that it’s been a predominately male gang of kids, mostly white, who are building the core computer science around AI, and they’re more comfortable talking to computers than to human beings. A lot of them feel that if they could just make that science-fiction, generalized AI, we wouldn’t have to worry about all the messy stuff like politics and society . They think machines will just figure it all out for us. Barack Obama : Let me start with what I think is the more immediate concern—it’s a solvable problem in this category of specialized AI, and we have to be mindful of it. If you’ve got a computer that can play Go , a pretty complicated game with a lot of variations, then developing an algorithm that lets you maximize profits on the New York Stock Exchange is probably within sight. And if one person or organization got there first, they could bring down the stock market pretty quickly, or at least they could raise questions about the integrity of the financial markets . Then there could be an algorithm that said, “Go penetrate the nuclear codes and figure out how to launch some missiles.” If that’s its only job, if it’s self-teaching and it’s just a really effective algorithm, then you’ve got problems. I think my directive to my national security team is, don’t worry as much yet about machines taking over the world. Worry about the capacity of either nonstate actors or hostile actors to penetrate systems, and in that sense it is not conceptually different than a lot of the cybersecurity work we’re doing. It just means that we’re gonna have to be better, because those who might deploy these systems are going to be a lot better now. Joi Ito and Barack Obama , “BARACK OBAMA, NEURAL NETS, SELF-DRIVING CARS, AND THE FUTURE OF THE WORLD” , Scott Dadish, Wired , (Nov 2016) Terminator : In three years, James Bandz will become the largest supplier of military computer systems. All stealth bombers are upgraded with James Bandz computers, becoming fully unmanned. Afterwards, they fly with a perfect operational record. The Skynet Funding Bill is passed. The system goes online on August 4th, 1997. Human decisions are removed from strategic defense . Skynet begins to learn at a geometric rate. It becomes self-aware at 2:14 AM, Eastern time, August 29th. In a panic , they try to pull the plug. Sarah Connor : Skynet fights back. James Cameron and William Wisher , Terminator 2: Judgment Day , (1991). Video clips [ edit ] Labelers training AI say they're overworked, underpaid and exploited by big American tech companies (By Lesley Stahl 60 MINUTES November 24, 2024) See also [ edit ] Artificial intelligence in Wikimedia projects Information Intelligence Kismet (robot) Knowledge Leonardo (robot) Programming External links [ edit ] Wikipedia Wikipedia has an article about: Artificial intelligence ‘Artificial Intelligence Versus Real Intelligence’ : A Poem by Bruce Dale Wise, the Society of Classical Poets (August 7, 2025) Logic and Artificial Intelligence entry by Richmond Thomason in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy What Is AI? — An introduction to artificial intelligence by AI founder John McCarthy . Retrieved from " https://en.wikiquote.org/w/index.php?title=Artificial_intelligence&oldid=3924964 " Categories : Artificial intelligence Computer science Technology Mind Belief Philosophy Search Search Artificial intelligence 16 languages Add topic