URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fortress_(programming_language)

Fortress (programming language) - Wikipedia Jump to content Search Search Fortress (programming language) 6 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Français 日本語 Русский Edit links From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Programming language Fortress Paradigms Multi-paradigm : structured , imperative , procedural Designed by Guy L. Steele Jr. , others Developer Sun Labs First appeared 2006 ; 20 years ago ( 2006 ) Final release 1.0_5033 / September 7, 2011 ; 14 years ago ( 2011-09-07 ) Typing discipline Static Scope Lexical Platform Java SE 1.6+ OS Cross-platform License BSD Website github .com /stokito /fortress-lang Influenced by Fortran , Scala , Haskell Fortress is a discontinued experimental programming language for high-performance computing , created by Sun Microsystems with funding from The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency's ( DARPA ) High Productivity Computing Systems project. One of the language designers was Guy L. Steele Jr. , whose prior work includes Scheme , Common Lisp , and Java . Design [ edit ] The name Fortress was intended to connote a secure Fortran , i.e., "a language for high-performance computation that provides abstraction and type safety on par with modern programming language principles." [ 1 ] Language features included implicit parallelism , Unicode support and concrete syntax similar to mathematical notation . The language was not designed to be similar to Fortran. Syntactically, it most resembles Scala , Standard ML , and Haskell . Fortress was designed from the outset to have multiple syntactic stylesheets. Source code can be rendered as ASCII text, in Unicode , or as a prettied image. This would allow for support of mathematical symbols and other symbols in the rendered output for easier reading. An emacs -based tool named fortify transforms ASCII-based Fortress source code into LaTeX output. [ 2 ] Fortress was also designed to be both highly parallel and have rich functionality contained within libraries, drawing from Java. For example, the for loop construct was a parallel operation, which would not necessarily iterate in a strictly linear manner, depending on the underlying implementation. However, the for construct was a library function and could be replaced by another version of the programmer's liking rather than being built into the language. Fortress' designers made its syntax as close as possible to pseudocode and analyzed hundreds of computer science and mathematics papers, courses, books and journals using pseudocode to extract the common usage patterns of the English language and standard mathematical notation when used to represent algorithms in pseudocode. Then they made the compiler trying to maintain a one-to-one correspondence between pseudocode and executable Fortress. [ 3 ] [ better source needed ] History [ edit ] Fortress was one of three languages created with funding from the High Productivity Computing Systems project; the others were X10 from IBM and Chapel from Cray, Inc . In November 2006, when DARPA approved funding for the third phase of the HPCS project, X10 and Chapel were funded, but Fortress was not, [ 4 ] leading to uncertainty about the future of Fortress. In January 2007, Fortress was released as open-source. [ 5 ] Version 1.0 of the Fortress Language Specification was released in April 2008, along with a compliant implementation targeting the Java virtual machine . In July 2012, Steele announced that active development on Fortress would cease after a brief winding-down period, citing complications with using Fortress's type system on existing virtual machines. [ 6 ] Example: Hello world! [ edit ] This is the Fortress version of the archetypal "Hello, World!" program , as presented in the Fortress Reference Card : [ 2 ] component hello export Executable run() = println("Hello, World!") end The export statement makes the program executable and every executable program in Fortress must implement the run() function. The file where the program is saved for compilation must have the same name as the one specified in the initial component statement. The println() function is what outputs the "Hello, World!" words on the screen. See also [ edit ] Free and open-source software portal Partitioned global address space SISAL References [ edit ] ^ Eric Allen; David Chase; Joe Hallett; Victor Luchangco; Jan-Willem Maessen; Sukyoung Ryu; Guy L. Steele Jr.; Sam Tobin-Hochstadt; et al. (2008-03-31). "The Fortress Language Specification: Version 1.0" (PDF) . research.sun.com . Sun Microsystems. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-01-20. ^ a b "Project Fortress Reference Card" (PDF) . Java.net . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2016-09-24 . ^ "pseudocode - Standards for pseudo code?" . Stack Overflow. 2009-10-16 . Retrieved 2016-09-24 . ^ Josh Simons (November 22, 2006). "Sun Not Selected for HPCS Phase III: My Thoughts" . The Navel of Narcissus . Archived from the original on 2012-01-06 – via blogs.oracle.com. ^ "What's Cool about Fortress" . gbcacm.org . Greater Boston Chapter of the ACM. {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) ^ Gls-Oracle (2012-07-20). "Fortress Wrapping Up" . Project Fortress . Archived from the original on 2016-09-24 – via blogs.oracle.com. External links [ edit ] Project website archive Active Timeline of Specification and Reference Implementation v t e Sun Microsystems Acquired by Oracle Hardware Systems SUN workstation Sun-1 Sun-2 Sun-3 Sun386i Sun-4 SPARCstation –server–center 1 2 4 5 10 20 classic IPC IPX LX ZX Netra Ultra 1 2 5 10 24 30 60 80 Enterprise 10000 Blade server Blade workstation Fire 12K 15K E25K T2000 X4500 SPARC Enterprise JavaStation Java Workstation Ray Cobalt Qube Cobalt RaQ Processors SPARC MB86900 microSPARC SuperSPARC UltraSPARC UltraSPARC II UltraSPARC IIe UltraSPARC IIi Gemini UltraSPARC III UltraSPARC III Cu UltraSPARC IIIi UltraSPARC IV UltraSPARC T1 UltraSPARC T2 SPARC T3 SPARC T4 SPARC T5 Rock MAJC Sun4d SBus Fireplane LOM port MBus Modular Datacenter Neptune System Service Processor SPARC T series SPOT Ultra Port Architecture Visual Instruction Set Software TOPS SunOS Solaris NIS NIS+ NFS ZFS ZFS+ SunView NeWS OpenWindows Java Desktop System Studio Java StarOffice iPlanet Java System Sun Secure Global Desktop MySQL xVM GlassFish VirtualBox Storage StorageTek 5800 System StorageTek SL8500 Open Storage QFS ZFS Performance Cloud Constellation System Visualization System Grid Engine Lustre Research Sun Microsystems Laboratories picoJava Fortress Project Looking Glass Education BlueJ Global Education & Learning Community SCPs Acquisitions Afara Websystems Cobalt Networks Gridware Lighthouse Design Montalvo Systems MySQL AB Pixo Procom Technology SavaJe StorageTek Tarantella Slogans The Network is the Computer Write once, run anywhere Community Common Development and Distribution License Java Community Process NetBeans OpenOffice.org OpenSolaris OpenSPARC OpenJDK Open Source University Meetup People Bill Joy Andy Bechtolsheim Scott McNealy Vinod Khosla Category v t e Numerical-analysis software Free Advanced Simulation Library ADMB Chapel Euler Mathematical Toolbox FreeFem++ FreeMat Genius Gmsh GNU Octave gretl Julia Jupyter ( Ju lia, Pyt hon, R ; IPython ) MFEM OpenFOAM Python R SageMath Salome ScicosLab Scilab X10 Weka Discontinued Fortress Proprietary DADiSP FEATool Multiphysics GAUSS LabVIEW Maple Mathcad Mathematica MATLAB MWorks SAS ( SAS Viya ) Speakeasy VisSim Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fortress_(programming_language)&oldid=1338139751 " Categories : Array programming languages Concurrent programming languages Discontinued programming languages Fortran programming language family JVM programming languages Numerical programming languages Programming languages supporting units of measure Programming languages created in 2006 Software using the BSD license Hidden categories: CS1 maint: deprecated archival service Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2014 Articles with example code Search Search Fortress (programming language) 6 languages Add topic