URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proprietary_firmware

Proprietary firmware - Wikipedia Jump to content Search Search Proprietary firmware Add languages Add links From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Firmware with restrictions on use, private modification, copying, or republishing The neutrality of this article is disputed . Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met . ( April 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Proprietary firmware is any firmware that has had its use, private modification, copying , or republishing restricted by the producer. Proprietors may enforce restrictions by technical means, such as by restricting source code access, firmware replacement restrictions (by denying complete tooling that may be necessary in order to recompile and replace the firmware), or by legal means, such as through copyright and patents . Alternatives to proprietary firmware may be free (libre) or open-source . Distribution [ edit ] Main article: Proprietary device driver § Device firmware Proprietary firmware (and especially the microcode) is much more difficult to avoid than proprietary software or even proprietary device drivers , because the firmware is usually very specific to the manufacturer of each device (often being unique for each model), and the programming documentation and complete specifications that would be necessary to create a replacement are often withheld by the hardware manufacturer. [ 1 ] Many open-source operating systems reluctantly choose to include proprietary firmware files in their distributions simply to make their device drivers work, [ 2 ] because manufacturers try to save money by removing flash memory or EEPROM from their devices, requiring the operating system to upload the firmware each time the device is used. [ 3 ] However, in order to do so, the operating system still has to have distribution rights for this proprietary microcode. [ 3 ] Security concerns [ edit ] Main article: Firmware § Security risks Proprietary firmware poses a significant security risk to the user because of the direct memory access (DMA) architecture of modern computers and the potential for DMA attacks . [ citation needed ] Theo de Raadt of OpenBSD suggests that wireless firmware are kept proprietary because of poor design quality and firmware defects. [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Mark Shuttleworth of Ubuntu suggests that "it's reasonable to assume that all firmware is a cesspool of insecurity courtesy of incompetence of the worst degree from manufacturers, and competence of the highest degree from a very wide range of such agencies". [ 6 ] The security and reliability risks posed by proprietary microcode may be lower than those posed by proprietary device drivers , because the microcode in this context isn't linked against the operating system , and doesn't run on the host's main processor . [ 2 ] Alternatives [ edit ] Custom firmware may still be available for certain products, which is often free and open-source software , and is especially popular in certain segments of hardware like gaming consoles , wireless routers and Android phones , which are capable of running complete general-purpose operating systems like Linux , FreeBSD or NetBSD , which are often the systems used by the manufacturer in their original proprietary firmware. Another potential solution is going with open-source hardware , which goes a step further by also providing schematics for replicating the hardware itself. Examples [ edit ] Breathalysers [ 7 ] Most BIOS found in IBM-compatible Personal Computers [ 6 ] Most UEFI found in modern x86-64 computers ARCS, used in computers from Silicon Graphics Run-Time Abstraction Services (RTAS), used in computers from IBM The iPod 's control menus Cisco IOS Microcode in wireless network interface controllers , video cards , x86 processors, etc. See also [ edit ] ROM image Open-source hardware Coreboot Open Firmware References [ edit ] ^ Jeremy Andrews (2005-03-08). "Feature: OpenBSD's "Out of the Box" Wireless Support" . KernelTrap . Archived from the original on 2005-03-09. ^ a b Jeremy Andrews (2006-05-02). "Interview: Theo de Raadt" . KernelTrap . Archived from the original on 2006-06-03. ^ a b Jeremy Andrews (2004-11-02). "Feature: OpenBSD Works To Open Wireless Chipsets" . KernelTrap . Archived from the original on 2006-06-20. ^ Theo de Raadt (2016-12-03). "Page 13: The hardware: 802.11 wireless networking (more detail)" . Open Documentation for Hardware . OpenCON 2006, 2–3 December 2006 . Courtyard Venice Airport, Venice/Tessera, Italy. ^ Constantine A. Murenin (2006-12-10). "Почему так важно иметь документацию по программированию железа" . Linux.org.ru (in Russian). ^ a b Mark Shuttleworth (2014-03-17). "ACPI, firmware and your security" . ^ "Drunk drivers granted access to breathalyser source code" . 2005-11-03. Archived from the original on 2008-09-30. v t e Free and open-source software General Alternative terms for free software Comparison of open-source and closed-source software Comparison of source-code-hosting facilities Free software Free software project directories Gratis versus libre Long-term support Open-source software Open-source software development Outline Timeline Software packages Audio Bioinformatics Codecs Configuration management Drivers Graphics Wireless Health Mathematics Office suites Operating systems Routing Television Video games Web applications E-commerce Android apps iOS apps Commercial Formerly proprietary Formerly open-source Community Free software movement History Open-source-software movement Events Advocacy Organisations Free Software Movement of India Free Software Foundation Licenses AFL Apache APSL Artistic Beerware BSD Creative Commons CDDL EPL Free Software Foundation GNU GPL GNU AGPL GNU LGPL ISC MIT MPL Python Python Software Foundation License Shared Source Initiative Sleepycat Unlicense WTFPL zlib Types and standards Comparison of licenses Contributor License Agreement Copyleft Debian Free Software Guidelines Definition of Free Cultural Works Free license The Free Software Definition The Open Source Definition Open-source license Permissive software license Public domain Challenges Digital rights management License proliferation Mozilla software rebranding Proprietary device drivers Proprietary firmware Proprietary software SCO/Linux controversies Software patents Software security Tivoization Trusted Computing Related topics Forking GNU Manifesto Microsoft Open Specification Promise Open-core model Open-source hardware Shared Source Initiative Source-available software The Cathedral and the Bazaar Revolution OS Portal Category v t e Embedded systems General terms ASIC Board support package Bootloader Consumer electronics Cross compiler Embedded database Embedded hypervisor Embedded OS Embedded software FPGA IoT Memory footprint Microcontroller Single-board computer Raspberry Pi SoC Firmware and controls Firmware Custom firmware Proprietary firmware Closed platform Crippleware Defective by Design Hacking of consumer electronics Homebrew (video games) iOS jailbreaking PlayStation 3 Jailbreak Rooting (Android) UEFI Vendor lock-in Boot loaders U-Boot Barebox Software libraries uClibc dietlibc Embedded GLIBC lwIP musl Programming tools Almquist shell BitBake Buildroot BusyBox OpenEmbedded Stand-alone shell Toybox Yocto Project Operating systems Linux on embedded systems Linux for mobile devices Light-weight Linux distribution Real-time operating system Windows IoT Win CE Programming languages Ada Assembly language CAPL Embedded C Embedded C++ Embedded Java MISRA C MicroPython Lightweight browsers List of open-source hardware Open-source robotics Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Proprietary_firmware&oldid=1334888941 " Categories : Free software culture and documents Proprietary software Software distribution Software licensing Firmware Hidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from April 2023 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Search Search Proprietary firmware Add languages Add topic