URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Free_Software_Definition

The Free Software Definition - Wikipedia Jump to content Search Search The Free Software Definition 16 languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Italiano 日本語 한국어 Nederlands Polski Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Free Software Foundation policy document defining free software The Free Software Definition is a policy document written by Richard Stallman and published by the Free Software Foundation (FSF). It defines free software as software that grants users the freedom to use, study, share, and modify the software. The term "free" is used in the sense of "free speech", not "free of charge". [ 1 ] The earliest known publication of the definition appeared in the February 1986 edition of the now-discontinued GNU's Bulletin published by the FSF. [ 2 ] Since 1996, the official version of the document has been maintained in the philosophy section of the GNU Project website. As of March 2025 [update] , the definition had seen 27 major revisions since it was originally published online and it had been translated into 65 languages. [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The FSF also publishes a list of licenses that meet this definition. The Four Essential Freedoms [ edit ] 4 Essential Freedoms of Software, made by Jeison Yehuda Amihud The definition published by the FSF in 1986 originally listed two key points: [ 2 ] The word "free" in our name does not refer to price; it refers to freedom. First, the freedom to copy a program and redistribute it to your neighbors, so that they can use it as well as you. Second, the freedom to change a program, so that you can control it instead of it controlling you; for this, the source code must be made available to you. In 1996, when the GNU Project website was launched, the definition was expanded to include "three levels of freedom", explicitly adding the freedom to study the software (which had been implied in the original). [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Stallman later discouraged describing them as "levels," noting that all freedoms are equally essential. [ 7 ] A fourth freedom was later introduced to explicitly affirm the user's right to run the program. Because it was seen as more fundamental than the others, it was placed first. Since the existing freedoms were numbered one through three, this new one was designated "freedom zero". [ 8 ] Such zero-based numbering , where counting begins at zero, is also a common convention in computer programming. [ 9 ] The modern definition states that a program is free software if it grants users the following four essential freedoms: [ 10 ] The freedom to run the program as you wish, for any purpose (freedom 0). The freedom to study how the program works, and change it to make it do what you wish (freedom 1). Access to the source code is a precondition for this. The freedom to redistribute copies so you can help others (freedom 2). The freedom to distribute copies of your modified versions to others (freedom 3). By doing this you can give the whole community a chance to benefit from your changes. Access to the source code is a precondition for this. Freedoms 1 and 3 require source code to be available, as studying and modifying software without source code is impractical. Later definitions [ edit ] In July 1997, Bruce Perens published the Debian Free Software Guidelines . [ 11 ] A definition based on the DFSG was later adopted by the Open Source Initiative (OSI) under the name The Open Source Definition . Comparison with the Open Source Definition [ edit ] Main article: Alternative terms for free software See also: Comparison of free and open-source software licenses Despite philosophical differences between the free software movement and the open-source movement , the FSF's definition of free software and the OSI's definition of open-source software describe largely overlapping sets of licenses, with only a few minor differences. While emphasizing these philosophical distinctions, the FSF states: The term "open source" software is used by some people to mean more or less the same category as free software. It is not exactly the same class of software: they accept some licences that we consider too restrictive, and there are free software licences they have not accepted. However, the differences in extension of the category are small: nearly all free software is open source, and nearly all open source software is free. — Free Software Foundation [ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Free and open-source software portal Free software movement (FSM) The GNU Manifesto Definition of Free Cultural Works Debian Free Software Guidelines The Open Source Definition Copyleft References [ edit ] ^ "What is free software?" . Free Software Foundation . Retrieved 2023-10-03 . ^ a b Stallman, Richard M. (February 1986). "GNU's Bulletin, Volume 1 Number 1" . Free Software Foundation. p. 8 . Retrieved 2019-02-08 . ^ "The Free Software Definition" . Free Software Foundation . Retrieved 2025-06-16 . ^ "The Free Software Definition – Translations" . Free Software Foundation . Retrieved 2023-10-03 . ^ "What is Free Software? - GNU Project - Free Software Foundation (FSF)" . Ru.j-npcs.org. 1997-03-20 . Retrieved 2013-10-03 . [ permanent dead link ] ^ "What is Free Software?" . GNU Project - Free Software Foundation . Archived from the original on January 26, 1998 . Retrieved 2013-10-03 . ^ Stallman, Richard (February 17, 2004). "Speech on Free Software" . GNU Project - Free Software Foundation . Archived from the original on 2025-03-17 . Retrieved 2025-06-17 . ^ Free Software Foundation (2018-07-21). "What is free software? - GNU Project - Free Software Foundation (Footnote)" . The reason they are numbered 0, 1, 2 and 3 is historical. Around 1990 there were three freedoms, numbered 1, 2 and 3. Then we realized that the freedom to run the program needed to be mentioned explicitly. It was clearly more basic than the other three, so it properly should precede them. Rather than renumber the others, we made it freedom 0. ^ "The Four Freedoms" . 23 January 2014. I [Matt Mullenweg] originally thought Stallman started counting with zero instead of one because he's a geek. He is, but that wasn't the reason. Freedoms one, two, and three came first, but later he wanted to add something to supersede all of them. So: freedom zero. The geekness is a happy accident. ^ Stallman, Richard. "The Free Software Definition" . Free Software Foundation . Retrieved 2013-10-15 . ^ Bruce Perens. "Debian's "Social Contract" with the Free Software Community" . debian-announce mailing list . ^ "Categories of Free and Nonfree Software - GNU Project - Free Software Foundation" . External links [ edit ] The Free Software Definition v t e Free and open-source software General Alternative terms for free software Comparison of open-source and closed-source software Comparison of source-code-hosting facilities Free software Free software project directories Gratis versus libre Long-term support Open-source software Open-source software development Outline Timeline Software packages Audio Bioinformatics Codecs Configuration management Drivers Graphics Wireless Health Mathematics Office suites Operating systems Routing Television Video games Web applications E-commerce Android apps iOS apps Commercial Formerly proprietary Formerly open-source Community Free software movement History Open-source-software movement Events Advocacy Organisations Free Software Movement of India Free Software Foundation Licenses AFL Apache APSL Artistic Beerware BSD Creative Commons CDDL EPL Free Software Foundation GNU GPL GNU AGPL GNU LGPL ISC MIT MPL Python Python Software Foundation License Shared Source Initiative Sleepycat Unlicense WTFPL zlib Types and standards Comparison of licenses Contributor License Agreement Copyleft Debian Free Software Guidelines Definition of Free Cultural Works Free license The Free Software Definition The Open Source Definition Open-source license Permissive software license Public domain Challenges Digital rights management License proliferation Mozilla software rebranding Proprietary device drivers Proprietary firmware Proprietary software SCO/Linux controversies Software patents Software security Tivoization Trusted Computing Related topics Forking GNU Manifesto Microsoft Open Specification Promise Open-core model Open-source hardware Shared Source Initiative Source-available software The Cathedral and the Bazaar Revolution OS Portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Free_Software_Definition&oldid=1335419128 " Categories : Free software Free Software Foundation Free and open-source software licenses Definitions Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2025 All articles containing potentially dated statements Search Search The Free Software Definition 16 languages Add topic