URL: https://hbr.org/2023/07/how-generative-ai-can-augment-human-creativity

How Generative AI Can Augment Human Creativity SKIP TO CONTENT Harvard Business Review Logo Harvard Business Review Logo AI and machine learning | How Generative AI Can Augment Human Creativity Subscribe Sign In Harvard Business Review Logo AI and machine learning How Generative AI Can Augment Human Creativity Use it to promote divergent thinking. by Tojin T. Eapen , Daniel J. Finkenstadt , Josh Folk and Lokesh Venkataswamy From the Magazine (July–August 2023) All images in this article were created using generative AI. These images were created using the prompts light bulb, flower, pastel, geometric shapes, simplicity, clean lines, and minimal still life. Midjourney Summary . Leer en español Ler em português Post Post Share Save Get PDF Buy Copies Print There is tremendous apprehension about the potential of generative AI—technologies that can create new content such as audio, text, images, and video—to replace people in many jobs. But one of the biggest opportunities generative AI offers to businesses and governments is to augment human creativity and overcome the challenges of democratizing innovation. Read more on AI and machine learning or related topics Creativity and Innovation A version of this article appeared in the July–August 2023 issue of Harvard Business Review. Tojin T. Eapen is the founder of the Center for Creative Foresight (CForesight) and a Senior Fellow at The Conference Board. He has advised several Fortune Global 500 firms on idea management, strategic foresight, and sustainable innovation, and he was previously on the faculty of the Trulaske College of Business at the University of Missouri. He is a member of the Thinkers50 Radar Class of 2026. Daniel J. Finkenstadt is a U.S. military officer, an academic researcher, and the principal of Wolf Stake Consulting. He is a coauthor of the books Supply Chain Immunity (2023) and Bioinspired Strategic Design (2024). Josh Folk is the CEO and cofounder of StratRocket, an AI-native innovation SaaS platform. Lokesh Venkataswamy is the CEO and managing director of Innomantra, an innovation and intellectual-property consulting firm in Bengaluru, India. Post Post Share Save Get PDF Buy Copies Print Read more on AI and machine learning or related topics Creativity and Innovation Partner Center