URL: https://hdl.handle.net/1721.1%2F52357

The New Frontier of Human-Level Artificial Intelligence Introduction DSpace@MIT View Item DSpace@MIT Home MIT Open Access Articles MIT Open Access Articles View Item DSpace@MIT Home MIT Open Access Articles MIT Open Access Articles View Item JavaScript is disabled for your browser. Some features of this site may not work without it. Toggle navigation The New Frontier of Human-Level Artificial Intelligence Introduction Author(s) Winston, Patrick Henry ; Beal, Jacob S. Download Beal_The-New-Frontier.pdf (1.877Mb) PUBLISHER_POLICY Publisher Policy Article is made available in accordance with the publisher's policy and may be subject to US copyright law. Please refer to the publisher's site for terms of use. Terms of use Article is made available in accordance with the publisher's policy and may be subject to US copyright law. Please refer to the publisher's site for terms of use. Metadata Show full item record Abstract Within the field of human-level intelligence, researchers are combining a variety of approaches toward the goals of human-like breadth, flexibility, and resilience for artificial intelligence systems. Each of the four papers in this special issue brings a different background and perspective on the subject, and hence a different technical approach. Date issued 2009-07 URI http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/52357 Department Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory ; Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Journal IEEE Intelligent Systems Publisher Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Citation Beal, Jacob, and Patrick H. Winston. “Guest Editors' Introduction: The New Frontier of Human-Level Artificial Intelligence.” Intelligent Systems, IEEE 24.4 (2009): 21-23. © 2009 IEEE Version: Final published version ISSN 1541-1672 Keywords intelligent systems, human-level intelligence, artificial intelligence, ai, IEEE Collections MIT Open Access Articles Show Statistical Information Search DSpace This Collection Browse All of DSpace Communities & Collections By Issue Date Authors Titles Subjects This Collection By Issue Date Authors Titles Subjects My Account Login Statistics OA Statistics Statistics by Country Statistics by Department