URL: https://iw.toolforge.org/scholia/topic/Q11660

Scholia Improve data This Toolforge instance of Scholia currently only has access to part of the data. There will be changes in the week of January 20th 2026 regarding the WDQS graph split and sunsetting of the legacy service. There is a qlever.scholia.wiki mirror running with QLever as backend with the full Wikidata content. This mirror is part of an evaluation of alternatives to Blazegraph . Topic Reasonator SQID The topic in context Recently published works on the topic Publications per year Earliest published works on the topic Authors Authors publishing about the topic Author score Authors scored according to field of work, publications within the topic and citing works within the topic. Missing authors here? Then go to the curation page to resolve the author names. Co-author graph The 25 most prolific authors and some of their key co-authors. Awards received by authors who published on the topic Topics Co-occurring topics Co-occurring topics graph Only a maximum of the 400 most often occuring links are shown. Co-occurring topics map Uses Venues and series publishing works about the topic Citations Works cited from works on the topic Authors cited from works on the topic Map of organizations associated with works about the topic The colours indicate how many publications on the topic are associated with organizations in the given location, as detailed in the legend (top right). Citation graph of works about the topic, aggregated by country The graph indicates the countries associated with organizations whose authors have published works on the topic, and indicates the most cited countries (arrowheads) as well as the countries they are most frequently cited from. Data from Wikidata and English Wikipedia | Code from GitHub repository | Hosted on Wikimedia Toolforge , a Wikimedia Foundation service | License for content: CC0 for data, CC-BY-SA for text and media | Report technical problems at Scholia's Issues GitHub page. | Follow us on Mastodon .