URL: https://techcrunch.com/2024/04/09/google-open-sources-tools-to-support-ai-model-development

Google open sources tools to support AI model development | TechCrunch –:–:–:– The first StrictlyVC of 2026 hits SF on April 30. Tickets are going fast. Register now. The first StrictlyVC of 2026 hits SF on April 30. Tickets are going fast. Register now. Close TechCrunch Desktop Logo TechCrunch Mobile Logo Search Submit Site Search Toggle Mega Menu Toggle Topics Latest AI Amazon Apps Biotech & Health Climate Cloud Computing Commerce Crypto Enterprise EVs Fintech Fundraising Gadgets Gaming Google Government & Policy Hardware Instagram Layoffs Media & Entertainment Meta Microsoft Privacy Robotics Security Social Space Startups TikTok Transportation Venture More from TechCrunch Staff Events Startup Battlefield StrictlyVC Newsletters Podcasts Videos Partner Content TechCrunch Brand Studio Crunchboard Contact Us Image Credits: Frederic Lardinois/TechCrunch AI Google open sources tools to support AI model development Kyle Wiggers 5:00 AM PDT · April 9, 2024 In a typical year, Cloud Next — one of Google’s two major annual developer conferences, the other being I/O — almost exclusively features managed and otherwise closed source, gated-behind-locked-down-APIs products and services. But this year, whether to foster developer goodwill or advance its ecosystem ambitions (or both), Google debuted a number of open source tools primarily aimed at supporting generative AI projects and infrastructure. The first, MaxDiffusion , which Google actually quietly released in February, is a collection of reference implementations of various diffusion models — models like the image generator Stable Diffusion — that run on XLA devices. “XLA” stands for Accelerated Linear Algebra, an admittedly awkward acronym referring to a technique that optimizes and speeds up specific types of AI workloads, including fine-tuning and serving. Google’s own tensor processing units (TPUs) are XLA devices, as are recent Nvidia GPUs. Beyond MaxDiffusion, Google’s launching JetStream , a new engine to run generative AI models — specifically text-generating models (so not Stable Diffusion). Currently limited to supporting TPUs with GPU compatibility supposedly coming in the future, JetStream offers up to 3x higher “performance per dollar” for models like Google’s own Gemma 7B and Meta’s Llama 2 , Google claims. “As customers bring their AI workloads to production, there’s an increasing demand for a cost-efficient inference stack that delivers high performance,” Mark Lohmeyer, Google Cloud’s GM of compute and machine learning infrastructure, wrote in a blog post shared with TechCrunch. “JetStream helps with this need … and includes optimizations for popular open models such as Llama 2 and Gemma.” Now, “3x” improvement is quite a claim to make, and it’s not exactly clear how Google arrived at that figure. Using which generation of TPU? Compared to which baseline engine? And how’s “performance” being defined here, anyway? I’ve asked Google all these questions and will update this post if I hear back. Techcrunch event Meet your next investor or portfolio startup at Disrupt Your next round. Your next hire. Your next breakout opportunity. Find it at TechCrunch Disrupt 2026, where 10,000+ founders, investors, and tech leaders gather for three days of 250+ tactical sessions, powerful introductions, and market-defining innovation. Register now to save up to $410. Meet your next investor or portfolio startup at Disrupt Your next round. Your next hire. Your next breakout opportunity. Find it at TechCrunch Disrupt 2026, where 10,000+ founders, investors, and tech leaders gather for three days of 250+ tactical sessions, powerful introductions, and market-defining innovation. Register now to save up to $410. San Francisco, CA | October 13-15, 2026 REGISTER NOW Second-to-last on the list of Google’s open source contributions are new additions to MaxText , Google’s collection of text-generating AI models targeting TPUs and Nvidia GPUs in the cloud. MaxText now includes Gemma 7B, OpenAI’s GPT-3 (the predecessor to GPT-4 ), Llama 2 and models from AI startup Mistral — all of which Google says can be customized and fine-tuned to developers’ needs. “ We’ve heavily optimized [the models’] performance on TPUs and also partnered closely with Nvidia to optimize performance on large GPU clusters,” Lohmeyer said. “These improvements maximize GPU and TPU utilization, leading to higher energy efficiency and cost optimization.” Finally, Google’s collaborated with Hugging Face, the AI startup, to create Optimum TPU , which provides tooling to bring certain AI workloads to TPUs. The goal is to reduce the barrier to entry for getting generative AI models onto TPU hardware, according to Google — in particular text-generating models. But at present, Optimum TPU is a bit bare-bones. The only model it works with is Gemma 7B. And Optimum TPU doesn’t yet support training generative models on TPUs — only running them. Google’s promising improvements down the line. Topics AI , Cloud Next , Enterprise , Enterprise , Generative AI , Google , google cloud , Google Cloud Next , Google Cloud Next 2024 , open source When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission . This doesn’t affect our editorial independence. Kyle Wiggers AI Editor Kyle Wiggers was TechCrunch’s AI Editor until June 2025. His writing has appeared in VentureBeat and Digital Trends, as well as a range of gadget blogs including Android Police, Android Authority, Droid-Life, and XDA-Developers. He lives in Manhattan with his partner, a music therapist. View Bio April 30 San Francisco, CA StrictlyVC kicks off the year in SF. Register now for unfiltered fireside chats and VC insights with leaders from Uber, Replit, Eclipse, and more. Plus, high-value connections that actually move the needle. Tickets are limited. REGISTER NOW Most Popular Two college kids raise a $5.1 million pre-seed to build an AI social network in iMessage Dominic-Madori Davis Meta’s loss is Thinking Machines’ gain Connie Loizos OpenAI releases GPT-5.5, bringing company one step closer to an AI ‘super app’ Lucas Ropek Microsoft offers buyout for up to 7% of US employees Amanda Silberling Techcrunch event Meet your next investor or portfolio startup at Disrupt Your next round. Your next hire. Your next breakout opportunity. Find it at TechCrunch Disrupt 2026, where 10,000+ founders, investors, and tech leaders gather for three days of 250+ tactical sessions, powerful introductions, and market-defining innovation. Register now to save up to $410. Meet your next investor or portfolio startup at Disrupt Your next round. Your next hire. Your next breakout opportunity. Find it at TechCrunch Disrupt 2026, where 10,000+ founders, investors, and tech leaders gather for three days of 250+ tactical sessions, powerful introductions, and market-defining innovation. Register now to save up to $410. San Francisco, CA | October 13-15, 2026 REGISTER NOW Duolingo is now giving users access to advanced learning content Lauren Forristal Unauthorized group has gained access to Anthropic’s exclusive cyber tool Mythos, report claims Lucas Ropek SpaceX is working with Cursor and has an option to buy the startup for $60B Tim Fernholz Loading the next article Error loading the next article