URL: https://techcrunch.com

TechCrunch | Startup and Technology News –:–:–:– The first StrictlyVC of 2026 hits SF on April 30. Tickets are going fast. Register now. The first StrictlyVC of 2026 hits SF on April 30. Tickets are going fast. Register now. Close TechCrunch Desktop Logo TechCrunch Mobile Logo Search Submit Site Search Toggle Mega Menu Toggle Topics Latest AI Amazon Apps Biotech & Health Climate Cloud Computing Commerce Crypto Enterprise EVs Fintech Fundraising Gadgets Gaming Google Government & Policy Hardware Instagram Layoffs Media & Entertainment Meta Microsoft Privacy Robotics Security Social Space Startups TikTok Transportation Venture More from TechCrunch Staff Events Startup Battlefield StrictlyVC Newsletters Podcasts Videos Partner Content TechCrunch Brand Studio Crunchboard Contact Us AI OpenAI ends Microsoft legal peril over its $50B Amazon deal Julie Bort 4 hours ago AI DeepMind’s David Silver just raised $1.1B to build an AI that learns without human data Anna Heim 4 hours ago AI China blocks Meta’s $2B Manus deal after months-long probe Kate Park 8 hours ago Top Headlines Meta inks deal for solar power at night, beamed from space Tim Fernholz OpenAI could be making a phone with AI agents replacing apps Ivan Mehta The Stanford freshmen who want to rule the world … will probably read this book and try even harder Connie Loizos TechCrunch Mobility: Elon’s admission Kirsten Korosec SpeakON’s dictation device is a good idea marred by platform limitations Ivan Mehta Latest News See More In Brief Letterboxd, the social platform for film buffs, reportedly looking for new owner Lucas Ropek 41 minutes ago Social Consumers lost $2.1B to social media scams in 2025, FTC reports Aisha Malik 2 hours ago AI OpenAI ends Microsoft legal peril over its $50B Amazon deal Julie Bort 4 hours ago AI DeepMind’s David Silver just raised $1.1B to build an AI that learns without human data Anna Heim 4 hours ago Security Hacker who allegedly carried out cyberattacks for China is extradited to US Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai 4 hours ago Apps Investors back Skye’s AI home screen app for iPhone ahead of launch Sarah Perez 5 hours ago Climate Data center demand drives 66% surge in natural gas power plant costs Tim De Chant 6 hours ago Government & Policy What’s behind Europe’s efforts to ditch US software in favor of sovereign tech Anna Heim 7 hours ago AI China blocks Meta’s $2B Manus deal after months-long probe Kate Park 8 hours ago Hardware OpenAI could be making a phone with AI agents replacing apps Ivan Mehta 8 hours ago Next April 30 San Francisco, CA StrictlyVC kicks off the year in SF. Register now for unfiltered fireside chats and VC insights with leaders from Uber, Replit, Eclipse, and more. Plus, high-value connections that actually move the needle. Tickets are limited. REGISTER NOW Most Popular Two college kids raise a $5.1 million pre-seed to build an AI social network in iMessage Dominic-Madori Davis Meta’s loss is Thinking Machines’ gain Connie Loizos OpenAI releases GPT-5.5, bringing company one step closer to an AI ‘super app’ Lucas Ropek Microsoft offers buyout for up to 7% of US employees Amanda Silberling Duolingo is now giving users access to advanced learning content Lauren Forristal Unauthorized group has gained access to Anthropic’s exclusive cyber tool Mythos, report claims Lucas Ropek SpaceX is working with Cursor and has an option to buy the startup for $60B Tim Fernholz Upcoming Events See More TechCrunch + SusHi Tech Tokyo 2026 Tokyo April 27 – 29, 2026 Register Now StrictlyVC San Francisco 2026 San Francisco, CA April 30, 2026 Presented by Register Now Limited Capacity StrictlyVC Athens 2026 May 27, 2026 Presented by Waitlist Now Waitlist to be the first to know when tickets go live! TechCrunch Disrupt 2026 San Francisco, CA October 13 – 15, 2026 Register Now Exhibit Now Save up to $410 with Early Bird deals TechCrunch Founder Summit 2026 Boston, Massachusetts November 4, 2026 Presented by Register Now Exhibit Now Save up to $190 with Early Bird Newsletters See More Subscribe for the industry’s biggest tech news TechCrunch Daily News Every weekday and Sunday, you can get the best of TechCrunch’s coverage. Startups Weekly Startups are the core of TechCrunch, so get our best coverage delivered weekly. TechCrunch Week in Review Get the best of our coverage, delivered to your inbox every Saturday. TechCrunch Mobility TechCrunch Mobility is your destination for transportation news and insight. No newsletters selected. Subscribe By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice . AI See More AI OpenAI ends Microsoft legal peril over its $50B Amazon deal Julie Bort 4 hours ago AI DeepMind’s David Silver just raised $1.1B to build an AI that learns without human data Anna Heim 4 hours ago Apps Investors back Skye’s AI home screen app for iPhone ahead of launch Sarah Perez 5 hours ago AI China blocks Meta’s $2B Manus deal after months-long probe Kate Park 8 hours ago Hardware OpenAI could be making a phone with AI agents replacing apps Ivan Mehta 8 hours ago Startups See More Apps Investors back Skye’s AI home screen app for iPhone ahead of launch Sarah Perez 5 hours ago In Brief To buy this Bay Area home, you’ll need Anthropic equity Anthony Ha 1 day ago Startups Why Tokyo is the most important tech destination of 2026 Cindy Zackney 2 days ago Startups India’s Snabbit seeks fresh funding at a $400M valuation, sources say Jagmeet Singh 2 days ago In Brief Lachy Groom to back India startup Pronto at a $200M valuation, sources say Jagmeet Singh 3 days ago Video See More AI Why Snowflake is no longer just a data warehouse Snowflake is betting that the future of AI⁠ isn’t just analyzing data, it’s acting on it. That means a shift away from chatbots and toward autonomous agents that can actually get work done. April 8, 2026 More From: Startups Tim Cook is stepping down. What happens to Apple now? Theresa Loconsolo 3 days ago 35 min Startups Why Artisan still ‘loves hiring humans’ despite ‘Stop Hiring Humans’ billboards Maggie Nye Isabelle Johannessen 4 days ago 35 min Startups Fusion power may not be sci-fi. Just ask the people who sunk $5B into it. Theresa Loconsolo Apr 22, 2026 32 min Startups Are we tokenmaxxing our way to nowhere? Theresa Loconsolo Apr 17, 2026 36 min Startups From the Startup Battlefield stage to the International Space Station: geCKo Materials built a sticky product Maggie Nye Isabelle Johannessen Apr 16, 2026 30 min Startups Aloe Blacc’s fame means nothing in biotech (and that’s the point) Theresa Loconsolo Apr 15, 2026 27 min Startups How to handle layoffs with compassion, with Ayal Yogev, Anjuna Maggie Nye Isabelle Johannessen Apr 9, 2026 44 min AI Why Snowflake is no longer just a data warehouse Theresa Loconsolo Rebecca Bellan Apr 8, 2026 25 min Venture Are orbital data centers all hype, or an actual AI infrastructure solution? Maggie Nye Kirsten Korosec Anthony Ha Sean O'Kane Apr 3, 2026 32 min Startups A diverse team will make your startup more successful Maggie Nye Isabelle Johannessen Apr 2, 2026 45 min Security See More Security Hacker who allegedly carried out cyberattacks for China is extradited to US Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai 4 hours ago Security Critical infrastructure giant Itron says it was hacked Zack Whittaker 8 hours ago Security Another spyware maker caught distributing fake Android snooping apps Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai 3 days ago Security Trump’s pick to run US cyber agency CISA asks to drop out Zack Whittaker 4 days ago Security Vercel says some of its customers’ data was stolen prior to its recent hack Zack Whittaker 4 days ago Venture See More Venture The Stanford freshmen who want to rule the world … will probably read this book and try even harder Connie Loizos 23 hours ago In Brief To buy this Bay Area home, you’ll need Anthropic equity Anthony Ha 1 day ago Climate The climate tech IPO window could finally be cracking open Tim De Chant 2 days ago Startups India’s Snabbit seeks fresh funding at a $400M valuation, sources say Jagmeet Singh 2 days ago Venture Steve Ballmer blasts founder he backed who pleaded guilty to fraud: ‘I was duped and feel silly’ Julie Bort 3 days ago AI ComfyUI hits $500M valuation as creators seek more control over AI-generated media Marina Temkin 3 days ago StrictlyVC San Francisco 2026 Uber CTO Praveen Neppalli Naga joins stacked StrictlyVC SF lineup for April 30 event TechCrunch Events 3 days ago Startups Tim Cook is stepping down. What happens to Apple now? Theresa Loconsolo 3 days ago 35 min Apps See More Apps Investors back Skye’s AI home screen app for iPhone ahead of launch Sarah Perez 5 hours ago Apps Spotify’s next frontier: Fitness content Sarah Perez 9 hours ago Apps Truecaller faces mounting pressures as its growth matures Jagmeet Singh 18 hours ago Hardware What Tim Cook built Anthony Ha 1 day ago Apps Apps to distract you from the endless cycle of doomscrolling Aisha Malik 2 days ago Transportation See More Transportation TechCrunch Mobility: Elon’s admission Kirsten Korosec 1 day ago Transportation Porsche is adding an all-electric Cayenne coupe to its lineup Kirsten Korosec 4 days ago Startups Redwood Materials loses COO amid layoffs, restructuring Sean O'Kane 4 days ago Transportation Tesla drops Musk’s $29B ‘interim’ award after Delaware court restored larger pay package Sean O'Kane 4 days ago Transportation Tesla just increased its spending plan to $25B — here’s where the money is going Kirsten Korosec Apr 22, 2026 In Brief In Brief Letterboxd, the social platform for film buffs, reportedly looking for new owner Lucas Ropek 41 minutes ago In Brief Amazon’s new podcast strategy: Monetize everything Anthony Ha 24 hours ago In Brief To buy this Bay Area home, you’ll need Anthropic equity Anthony Ha 1 day ago In Brief Anthropic created a test marketplace for agent-on-agent commerce Anthony Ha 2 days ago In Brief Maine’s governor vetoes data center moratorium Anthony Ha 2 days ago In Brief Lachy Groom to back India startup Pronto at a $200M valuation, sources say Jagmeet Singh 3 days ago Podcasts See More Build Mode Build Mode is a survival guide for early-stage founders navigating the messy, high-stakes chaos of building a company from scratch. No sugarcoating. No hype. Just candid conversations and tactical advice from the people who’ve done it before and have the scars (and term sheets) to prove it. Hosted by Startup Battlefield Editor Isabelle Johannessen, you can find Build Mode here or in your favorite podcast feed every Thursday by subscribing today. 16 Episodes Updated: Apr 23, 2026 Explore All Equity Equity is TechCrunch’s flagship podcast about the business of startups, unpacked by the writers who know best. Produced by Theresa Loconsolo. Edited by Kell. 1081 Episodes Updated: Apr 24, 2026 Explore All StrictlyVC Download Each week, StrictlyVC’s host and TechCrunch Editor-in-Chief Connie Loizos, with Alex Gove, former journalist, VC and operating exec, review the top stories in StrictlyVC and interview a mover and shaker in the world of tech. 58 Episodes Updated: Apr 7, 2026 Explore All