URL: https://theweek.com/tech/unreal-quantum-leap-ai-video-google

Unreal: A quantum leap in AI video | The Week Don't miss these Personal Technology Cyberdecks are unique, customizable and a technological rebellion Media The pros and cons of social media Tech The Internet Archive is in danger Tech The fear over Anthropic’s new AI model Mythos Business Elon Musk’s starry mega-merger Business Companies are increasingly AI washing Business Anthropic: AI triggers the ‘SaaSpocalypse’ Business OpenAI: Ending its AI video feature Business TikTok: New owners, same risks Tech Is AI really enabling productivity gains? Business AI fears are giving rise to ‘HALO trading’ Business AI: When your financial adviser is a chatbot Personal Technology Generative AI is reshaping gaming, but not everyone approves Tech RAMageddon is ravaging the tech industry Tech AI is giving people bad and dangerous advice to validate its users Unreal: A quantum leap in AI video Google's new Veo 3 is making it harder to distinguish between real videos and AI-generated ones By The Week US published 17 June 2025 Veo 3 produces AI clips that are "nearly indistinguishable from real ones." (Image credit: Jeff Chiu / AP) Share Copy link Facebook X Linkedin Whatsapp Pinterest Share this article Join the conversation Follow us Add us as a preferred source on Google Newsletter TheWeek Sign up for Today's Best Articles in your inbox A free daily email with the biggest news stories of the day – and the best features from TheWeek.com Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over. You are now subscribed Your newsletter sign-up was successful An account already exists for this email address, please log in. Subscribe to our newsletter AI video has made it harder than ever to trust what you're seeing online, said Andrew R. Chow and Billy Perrigo in Time . "While text-to-video generators have existed for several years," Google's new Veo 3 video generator "marks a significant jump forward." Unlike OpenAI's video generator, Sora, Veo 3 introduces sound, producing AI clips that "are nearly indistinguishable from real ones." Within days of its release, users had already posted "fake news segments in multiple languages, including an anchor announcing the death of author J.K. Rowling." (She is not dead.) Previous versions of AI videos were either comically crude or easily detectable as being manipulated. Today's models are so good they're frightening—and they will have real-world implications. The genie is out of the bottle, said Ruben Circelli in PCMag . AI video generation is only going to get more realistic from here. When Veo 3 inevitably allows users to generate videos based on pictures you upload, the harassment potential will multiply. "Don't like your boss? Send a clip to HR of them doing something inappropriate." With this technology, "the only real limits are your imagination and your morality." Google has some "obvious guardrails" in place, said Allison Johnson in The Verge . "You can't prompt it to create a video of Biden tripping and falling," nor can you create a fake news anchor announcing the assassination of a president. That said, I was easily able to prompt Veo 3 "to create a video of the Space Needle on fire." I imagine it won't be long before a full-length movie will get made with Veo 3. Hollywood is warming to the creative possibilities, said Lila Shapiro in Vulture . Several effects studios have launched recently that work with generative video. One of them, Runway, has a partnership with Lionsgate, which turned over its entire library, to "repackage and resell" content the studio owns. "Now we can say, 'Do it in anime, make it PG-13,'" Lionsgate vice-chairman Michael Burns said. "Three hours later, I'll have the movie." AI can make possible scenes—for instance, "10,000 soldiers on a hillside in a snowstorm"—that would cost millions to make with live actors. For amateurs, though, the process for making real creative work is still daunting, said Joanna Stern and Jarrard Cole in The Wall Street Journal . Even using Veo 3 and multiple helper tools, you are not going to "paste in a script and out pops a Netflix hit." We did manage to make a short funny film. Some of it was realistic enough that it will "blow you away." But it took making 1,000 separate clips to get it right—and a lot of "human input, creativity, and original ideas." Article continues below You may like Pitt vs. Cruise: The AI clip that shook Hollywood OpenAI: Ending its AI video feature Generative AI is reshaping gaming, but not everyone approves The Week Escape your echo chamber. Get the facts behind the news, plus analysis from multiple perspectives. SUBSCRIBE & SAVE Sign up for The Week's Free Newsletters From our morning news briefing to a weekly Good News Newsletter, get the best of The Week delivered directly to your inbox. From our morning news briefing to a weekly Good News Newsletter, get the best of The Week delivered directly to your inbox. Sign up Sign up for Today's Best Articles in your inbox A free daily email with the biggest news stories of the day – and the best features from TheWeek.com Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors The Week US Read more Film Pitt vs. Cruise: The AI clip that shook Hollywood Business OpenAI: Ending its AI video feature Personal Technology Generative AI is reshaping gaming, but not everyone approves Tech AI: Yes, it’s coming for your job Latest in Tech Tech The Internet Archive is in danger Tech The fear over Anthropic’s new AI model Mythos Tech How ‘residential proxy networks’ invite hackers in your home Tech Social media: Will jury awards protect kids from damage? Latest in Feature Political Cartoons 5 straight up hilarious cartoons about the Strait of Hormuz Political Cartoons 5 outrageously funny cartoons about Trump feuding with Pope Leo Property 6 spacious homes with bunk rooms Business Retirement: Trump’s risky plan to reform 401(k)s