URL: https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022Natur.602..223W

Outracing champion Gran Turismo drivers with deep reinforcement learning - ADS Now on home page ADS Outracing champion Gran Turismo drivers with deep reinforcement learning Wurman, Peter R. ; Barrett, Samuel ; Kawamoto, Kenta ; MacGlashan, James ; Subramanian, Kaushik ; Walsh, Thomas J. ; Capobianco, Roberto ; Devlic, Alisa ; Eckert, Franziska ; Fuchs, Florian ; Gilpin, Leilani ; Khandelwal, Piyush ; Kompella, Varun ; Lin, HaoChih ; MacAlpine, Patrick ; Oller, Declan ; Seno, Takuma ; Sherstan, Craig ; Thomure, Michael D. ; Aghabozorgi, Houmehr ; Barrett, Leon ; Douglas, Rory ; Whitehead, Dion ; Dürr, Peter ; Stone, Peter ; Spranger, Michael ; Kitano, Hiroaki Abstract Many potential applications of artificial intelligence involve making real-time decisions in physical systems while interacting with humans. Automobile racing represents an extreme example of these conditions; drivers must execute complex tactical manoeuvres to pass or block opponents while operating their vehicles at their traction limits 1 . Racing simulations, such as the PlayStation game Gran Turismo, faithfully reproduce the non-linear control challenges of real race cars while also encapsulating the complex multi-agent interactions. Here we describe how we trained agents for Gran Turismo that can compete with the world's best e-sports drivers. We combine state-of-the-art, model-free, deep reinforcement learning algorithms with mixed-scenario training to learn an integrated control policy that combines exceptional speed with impressive tactics. In addition, we construct a reward function that enables the agent to be competitive while adhering to racing's important, but under-specified, sportsmanship rules. We demonstrate the capabilities of our agent, Gran Turismo Sophy, by winning a head-to-head competition against four of the world's best Gran Turismo drivers. By describing how we trained championship-level racers, we demonstrate the possibilities and challenges of using these techniques to control complex dynamical systems in domains where agents must respect imprecisely defined human norms. Publication: Nature Pub Date: February 2022 DOI: 10.1038/s41586-021-04357-7 Bibcode: 2022Natur.602..223W full text sources Publisher | 🌓