URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20240614144506/https://www.bnnbloomberg.ca/50-50-chance-that-ai-outsmarts-humanity-geoffrey-hinton-says-1.2085394

'50-50 chance' that AI outsmarts humanity, Geoffrey Hinton says - BNN Bloomberg {{ currentBoardShortName }} Markets Indices Currencies Energy Metals {{data.symbol | reutersRICLabelFormat:group.RICS}} {{data.netChng | number: 4 }} {{data.netChng | number: 2 }} {{data | displayCurrencySymbol}} {{data.price | number: 4 }} {{data.price | number: 2 }} {{data.symbol | reutersRICLabelFormat:group.RICS}} {{data.netChng | number: 4 }} {{data.netChng | number: 2 }} {{data | displayCurrencySymbol}} {{data.price | number: 4 }} {{data.price | number: 2 }} Markets As of: {{timeStamp.date}} {{timeStamp.time}} Markets {{ currentBoardShortName }} Markets Indices Currencies Energy Metals {{data.symbol | reutersRICLabelFormat:group.RICS}} {{data.netChng | number: 4 }} {{data.netChng | number: 2 }} {{data | displayCurrencySymbol}} {{data.price | number: 4 }} {{data.price | number: 2 }} {{data.symbol | reutersRICLabelFormat:group.RICS}} {{data.netChng | number: 4 }} {{data.netChng | number: 2 }} {{data | displayCurrencySymbol}} {{data.price | number: 4 }} {{data.price | number: 2 }} {{ stock.symbol }} {{ stock.price | currency }} {{ stock | formatPrefix }}{{ stock.netChng | formatNetChange }} Are you looking for a stock? Try one of these {{result.description}} {{result.ric}} More Results BNN Are you looking for a stock? Try one of these {{result.description}} {{result.ric}} More Results Live Video Shows Market Call Markets Investing Personal Finance Real Estate Company News Commodities Economics Politics Technology Opinion ETFs Business of Sports International Market Call Schedule Listen Live Video Shows Market Call Markets Scoreboard BNN News Investing News Video ETFs REITs Tesla Shareholders Vote No on Deep Sea Mining Moratorium ECB’s Lagarde Says Disinflation in Euro Zone Will Be Bumpy Markets Cheer South Africa’s Move to Broad Government Alliance Brazil Economic Activity Flatlines Ahead of Crucial Interest Rate Decision French Development Bank SFIL Pulls Bond Sale Amid Election Angst Panama Canal Averts Shipping Crisis With Its Water Plan — and Some Luck Ghana Sends New Debt Rework Proposal to Advance Bondholder Talks MicroStrategy Increases Convertible Note Sale by 40% to $700 Million US Consumer Sentiment Unexpectedly Falls to Seven-Month Low Eskom CEO Who Started as Blackouts Stopped Intensifies Recovery Judge Likely to Kill $30 Billion Visa, Mastercard Swipe-Fee Deal Musk Answers Tesla Faithful With Trillion-Dollar Robot Prophesy Crypto Titans’ $160 Million War Chest Threatens Senate Democrats Apple Eyes Best Week Since 2021 on Bet AI iPhones Are Must-Haves Kraken Owner Holloway Builds on Seattle Vision With NBA Hopes US Pensions Compete With Gulf Funds for First Shot at PE Deals Allianz Is Said to Weigh Deal With Singapore’s Income Insurance Vodafone Plans to Sell $2.3 Billion Stake in Indus, Reuters Says Banks Said to Urge Hong Kong to Be More Flexible on Convertible Bonds and Stock Buybacks Sheinbaum Win Gives AMLO One More Shot to Boost State Utilities Personal Finance News Video How listing a trusted contact could foil financial elder abuse within families 4 of the worst pieces of advice from the investment industry Borrowers revel in interest rate cut as the party ends for savers What the Bank of Canada rate cut means for mortgages, consumer loans and investments What high earners should do to manage their wealth and save time More Canadians only making minimum payment on credit cards: TransUnion Mortgage lending among top risks facing financial system: OSFI Entrepreneurs already leaving Canada due to capital gains hike, Wattpad founder Allen Lau says 'Sell in May and go away' makes less sense as technicals point to summer rally Treat the future you: 3 smart ways to invest your tax refund Young investors more likely to switch advisers, citing high fees: J.D. Power survey Ottawa moves to expand CRA audit powers. What you should know Inflation, cost of living hurting education savings plans: survey First 2024 Canada carbon rebates will be deposited today for some Canadians Insurance is high on frequently stolen vehicles. Here's how to reduce your premiums The big benefits of adopting a debt-free lifestyle Benefits await gig workers who come clean with CRA Most young adults think retiring by 65 is outdated: survey Sick of extra fees online? It's drip pricing, and Canadian shoppers are fighting back Many Canadians still feeling squeezed even as debt worries ease: insolvency firm Real Estate News Video REITs Kraken Owner Holloway Builds on Seattle Vision With NBA Hopes Blackstone Opts to Sweeten Deal as REITs Upend Usual Playbook UK Housebuilders in Merger Mode as Election Points to Revival Turkey Studies New Taxes Worth $7 Billion That Target Corporates Deals Heat Up for Alternative Asset Managers Hunting Billions China’s Credit Returns to Expansion as Government Sells Bonds Britons Expect Rate Rises Even as Inflation Falls, BOE Says CapitaLand Group to Start an Operation in India’s GIFT City Crest Nicholson Says It Rejected Bellway Takeover Offer in May Turkey Plans to Limit Tax Exemption REITs Enjoyed for Decades World-Beating REIT’s Rally May Extend on AI Data Center Demand Homebuilders Eye Election Boost From Long-Awaited UK Reforms Starwood Nears Sale of 1 Hotel Central Park to Host India Markets Buzz: Adani Expands Cement Ambition Miami Tower Weighs Cutting Ties to Broker After Rape Accusation China Steel Demand Plateaus at a Decent Level, Vale’s Boss Says Mortgage Rates Fall for a Second Week With All Eyes on the Fed California Sets Map of Wildfire Risk in Push to Expand Insurance MacKay Shields Launches ETF Aimed at Structured Finance Sector Stocks, Real Estate Push Canada Household Net Worth to New High Company News News Video Tesla Shareholders Vote No on Deep Sea Mining Moratorium Markets Cheer South Africa’s Move to Broad Government Alliance French Development Bank SFIL Pulls Bond Sale Amid Election Angst London Hospitals Knew of Cyber Vulnerabilities Years Before Hack Panama Canal Averts Shipping Crisis With Its Water Plan — and Some Luck Ghana Sends New Debt Rework Proposal to Advance Bondholder Talks MicroStrategy Increases Convertible Note Sale by 40% to $700 Million US Consumer Sentiment Unexpectedly Falls to Seven-Month Low Eskom CEO Who Started as Blackouts Stopped Intensifies Recovery PG&E; Sees ‘Underutilized’ Grid Ready for Surge in Power Demand Archegos Trial Dredges Up $2 Trillion Family Office Dispute Judge Likely to Kill $30 Billion Visa, Mastercard Swipe-Fee Deal Musk Answers Tesla Faithful With Trillion-Dollar Robot Prophesy Crypto Titans’ $160 Million War Chest Threatens Senate Democrats Saudis Expected to Attend Ukraine Summit After Zelenskiy’s Visit Apple Eyes Best Week Since 2021 on Bet AI iPhones Are Must-Haves Kraken Owner Holloway Builds on Seattle Vision With NBA Hopes US Pensions Compete With Gulf Funds for First Shot at PE Deals Allianz Is Said to Weigh Deal With Singapore’s Income Insurance Vodafone Plans to Sell $2.3 Billion Stake in Indus, Reuters Says Commodities News Show Guests CANNABIS Oil Gold Silver Tesla Shareholders Vote No on Deep Sea Mining Moratorium French Development Bank SFIL Pulls Bond Sale Amid Election Angst Panama Canal Averts Shipping Crisis With Its Water Plan — and Some Luck Eskom CEO Who Started as Blackouts Stopped Intensifies Recovery PG&E; Sees ‘Underutilized’ Grid Ready for Surge in Power Demand Musk Answers Tesla Faithful With Trillion-Dollar Robot Prophesy Sheinbaum Win Gives AMLO One More Shot to Boost State Utilities Ex-Goldman Banker Teams Up With Lawyers to Target Carbon Market FAA Probes Titanium With Fake Documents Used by Airbus, Boeing Bird Flu Traces Emerge in Austin Sewage, Far From Dairy Farms Starmer Can Raise Taxes on Banks, Pensions Without a Big U-Turn Turkey Studies New Taxes Worth $7 Billion That Target Corporates G-7 Pledge to Step Up Action on Russia Oil Fleet, Energy, Metals Tesla, Exxon AGMs See Norway’s $1.7 Trillion Fund Raising Voice Thailand’s $38 Billion Fund Says Gold to Counteract Weak Stocks In Catan: New Energies, the Goal Is Avoiding Climate Catastrophe Singapore’s Ship-Fuel Sales Surge as Global Trade Flows Jolted French Finance Chief Warns Left-Wing Bloc Would Trigger EU Exit Atos Gets €700 Million Bid from France for Strategic Businesses Oil price news: Oil pares weekly gain on sliding equities and demand concerns Economics News Video '50-50 chance' that AI outsmarts humanity, Geoffrey Hinton says Statistics Canada reports manufacturing sales up 1.1% at $70.8B in April The Daily Chase: French election anxiety continues to weigh down European shares Fiera CEO says Bank of Canada has clear path to 3% interest rate Statistics Canada says Canadian household debt relative to income down in Q1 Bank of Canada deputy governor says bar for using QE again will be very high The Daily Chase: Tesla shares surge as investors vote on 2 resolutions Canada needs 'laser-focused' productivity strategy, Dodge says Interest rate policy in Canada and U.S. diverging U.S. Fed officials dial back rate forecasts, signal just one '24 cut U.S. inflation broadly cools in encouraging sign for Fed officials The Daily Chase: Fed and CPI day in the U.S. More groundwork needed to maintain Canada-U.S. relations, summit hears Capital gains tax hike a start but Canada needs more revenue, IMF says The Daily Chase: U.S. business groups push back on Canada's proposed digital services tax How e.l.f. Beauty is turning social media popularity into booming sales The Daily Chase: Contentious capital gains tax plan set to go to a vote Canada consumer confidence hits 2-year high as pessimism falls Canada's jobless rate rises to 6.2% in May as labour market disappoints jobseekers The Daily Chase: Jobs numbers in Canada and U.S. Politics News Video Markets Cheer South Africa’s Move to Broad Government Alliance Brazil Economic Activity Flatlines Ahead of Crucial Interest Rate Decision French Development Bank SFIL Pulls Bond Sale Amid Election Angst Trump, Biden Prep for Debate Where Any Misstep Threatens Hopes Bump Stock Ban Tossed Out by Supreme Court in Gun-Rights Win Judge Likely to Kill $30 Billion Visa, Mastercard Swipe-Fee Deal Crypto Titans’ $160 Million War Chest Threatens Senate Democrats French Republican Party Faces Implosion as Boss Fights Eviction Sheinbaum Win Gives AMLO One More Shot to Boost State Utilities South African Unity Government Partners Agree Deal on Key Posts French Left Unveils Plan to Undo Macron’s Reforms and Defy EU Macron Election Call Sends French Markets to Worst Week in Years Starmer Can Raise Taxes on Banks, Pensions Without a Big U-Turn UK Housebuilders in Merger Mode as Election Points to Revival Turkey Studies New Taxes Worth $7 Billion That Target Corporates UK’s Sunak Forced to Deny Being Snubbed at G-7 After D-Day Gaffe Thailand’s $38 Billion Fund Says Gold to Counteract Weak Stocks South Africa Unity Government Parties Back Rapid Economic Growth French Finance Chief Warns Left-Wing Bloc Would Trigger EU Exit India’s Foreign Reserves Rise to Fresh Record After Election Technology News Video Tesla Shareholders Vote No on Deep Sea Mining Moratorium London Hospitals Knew of Cyber Vulnerabilities Years Before Hack MicroStrategy Increases Convertible Note Sale by 40% to $700 Million Musk Answers Tesla Faithful With Trillion-Dollar Robot Prophesy Crypto Titans’ $160 Million War Chest Threatens Senate Democrats Apple Eyes Best Week Since 2021 on Bet AI iPhones Are Must-Haves Vodafone Plans to Sell $2.3 Billion Stake in Indus, Reuters Says Banks Said to Urge Hong Kong to Be More Flexible on Convertible Bonds and Stock Buybacks Sheinbaum Win Gives AMLO One More Shot to Boost State Utilities Bitfarms Shares Rise After Riot Raises Pressure in Takeover Bid Adobe Projects Strong Profit, Signaling It’s Part of AI Boom Hinduja Family Staff Settle Civil Lawsuit Over Domestic Workers’ Exploitation Allegations Pope Lands at G-7 as Abortion Reference Dropped From Communique Turkey Studies New Taxes Worth $7 Billion That Target Corporates In Catan: New Energies, the Goal Is Avoiding Climate Catastrophe Binance Says Nigeria Drops Some Charges Against Jailed Executive Norway’s Tax-the-Rich Drive Provokes Widening Business Backlash Atos Gets €700 Million Bid from France for Strategic Businesses Richemont’s Online Luxury Retailer Net-A-Porter to Exit China The AI Revolution Comes for Farmers Growing a Third of Our Food Opinion News Alphabet investors shouldn't ignore the warning signs: Martin Peers The U.S. Fed is failing in four ways: Mohamed A. El-Erian Apple, JPMorgan turn to pay now grow later Remote Working Boom Is Huge for College Towns Like Knoxville Walmart flashes a warning sign to the entire consumer economy: Andrea Felsted Millennials are finally spending like grown-ups Dismal U.S. GDP report raises the odds of recession this year: Gary Shilling Musk is wrong for Twitter even if deal math works out Chocolate bunnies can teach us to save our food supply The Fed has made a U.S. recession inevitable America's oil reserve weapon risks misfiring Four-day workweeks can burn you out U.S. Fed expects a soft landing. Don't count on it Markets are pushing Fed into developing-economy territory Commodity traders go from bonanza to bailout plea Putin's war shows West must clean up dirty money Salary transparency is good for everyone Microsoft's US$69B Activision deal could be a blunder What if the oil market bulls are wrong and this lonely bear is right? Canada's trucker protest may spread from Ottawa to U.S. ETFs News Video Berman's Call MicroStrategy Increases Convertible Note Sale by 40% to $700 Million Bonds Are Beating Bitcoin as Doubts Gather Over Crypto Rebound Bitcoin Miners Pivot to Southeast Asia After China Crackdown Ether ETF Could Get Approved This Summer, SEC’s Gensler Says Binance CEO Teng Sees ‘Landmark’ Year as Crypto Goes Mainstream MacKay Shields Launches ETF Aimed at Structured Finance Sector Stocks, Real Estate Push Canada Household Net Worth to New High Trump Meets Bitcoin Miners in His Latest Pro-Crypto Overture Global Money Has Started Tiptoeing Back Into Indian Equities Popular Hedge-Fund Trade Pushes Bitcoin-Futures Shorts to Record Bitcoin Faces ‘Crucial’ 36 Hours on Heightened Sensitivity to US Yields Argentine Bonds, Peso Tumble as Wall Street Gets a Reality Check Janus ETF Tracking CLOs Hits $10 Billion in Zero-Sum Race Ether Investment Products See Largest Weekly Inflows Since March Kenyan Bourse Seeks to End Listing Drought as Sentiment Improves Bitcoin Rally and ‘Short Memories’ Reignite Everything In Crypto BlackRock Model Shakeup Spurs $4 Billion Growth-Stock ETF Surge China’s $2 Trillion Stock Rally Lures Global Fund Holdouts Despite Risks US Bitcoin ETFs Post Longest Run of Inflows as Token Nears Record EU Funds Face Fresh Pressure to Dump US Stocks Under New ESG Regulations Business of Sports Soccer Business Set to Soar in North America and the World Oilers Stanley Cup Final berth promoting Alberta’s capital Transforming Curling with New Energy and Proven Strategies Canadian Elite Basketball League’s Sweet 6th Season Begins Proof of Concept Proves Way Forward for PWHL Business considerations for Toronto’s WNBA expansion franchise Athletes and luxury fashion are taking the brand partnership model to new heights Need to Know: Who are the 10 CEBL teams? Money Made at Masters is Under Par Women’s Counter Strike 2 National Team building inclusive space Money Makes March Mad Caitlin Clark re-calibrates basketball Looking for an early retirement? Try competitive League of Legends Raptors return on investment is the real deal The Super Bowl’s stay in Vegas What to watch for in the Canadian sports betting and gaming biz in 2024 Esports popularity shifting the playing field Tennis' break point opportunity NBA’s In-Season Tournament a slam dunk for Off-Season Negotiations MLS Cup the winning goal in record-breaking season for soccer in North America International News Video More... Market Call Schedule Listen Live Video Shows Market Call Markets More Live Video Shows Market Call Markets BANK OF CANADA INFLATION INTEREST RATES REAL ESTATE CANNABIS OIL GOLD NEWSLETTERS TOP PICKS LIVE: Watch BNN Bloomberg, Canada's Business News Network, live here now Economics News Video Article News Video More News Video Latest Videos {{ currentStream.Name }} Related Video Up Next Now Showing {{ video.Name }} Continuous Play: ON OFF The information you requested is not available at this time, please check back again soon. More Video Most Popular Content {{item.title | formatTitle}} Economics 9m ago '50-50 chance' that AI outsmarts humanity, Geoffrey Hinton says Jon Erlichman , BNN Bloomberg Last year, Geoffrey Hinton resigned his role at the company so he could speak more freely about the existential risks surrounding AI. Geoffrey Hinton remembers the moment he became the "godfather" of artificial intelligence. It was more than a decade ago, at a meeting with other researchers, including fellow AI guru Andrew Ng, who gave him the title. "It wasn’t intended as complimentary, I don’t think," Hinton recalled in our exclusive television interview. “We just had a session where I was interrupting everybody and I was the senior guy there who had organized the meeting, so he started referring to me as the godfather." Today, Hinton is using his influence to interrupt another conversation. At a time when the AI boom is pushing tech company valuations into the trillions, Hinton is urging the industry to set aside vast sums of money to address an existential threat -- what happens if AI becomes smarter than humans? The information you need to know, sent directly to you: Download the BNN Bloomberg App "I think there’s a 50-50 chance it will get more intelligent than us in the next 20 years," he said. "We’ve never had to deal with things more intelligent than us. And so people should be very uncertain about what it will look like." Given the unknowns, Hinton believes companies should be spending between 20 to 30 per cent of their computing resources to examine how this intelligence might eventually evade human control. Currently, he doesn’t see firms spending anywhere close to that amount on safety. "It would seem very wise to do lots of empirical experiments when it’s slightly less smart than us so we still have a chance at staying in control.” Given the realities of capitalism, Hinton has little faith that companies individually will pick safety over profits. So he wants political leaders to step in urgently. "I think governments are the only thing powerful enough to slow that down." AI getting smarter In making his case, Hinton points to the rapid rise of OpenAI and its ChatGPT technology. "If you take something like GPT-4, which is bigger than GPT-3, it is quite a lot smarter. It answers a whole bunch of questions correctly that GPT-3 would get wrong." "So we know these things will get more intelligent just by making them bigger. But in addition to them getting more intelligent by being made bigger, we’ll have scientific breakthroughs." Meanwhile, Hinton points to the fact that self-preservation is already being built into the industry’s technology, to ensure things like chatbots can function effectively when they encounter problems, such as data center disruptions. "As soon as they’ve got self-interest, you’ll get evolution kicking in," he said. "Suppose there’s two chatbots and one’s a bit more self-interested than the other…the slightly more self-interested one will grab more data centers because it knows it can get smarter if it gets more data centers to look at data with. So now you’ve got competition between chatbots. And as soon as evolution kicks in, we know what happens: the most competitive one wins, and we will be left in the dust if that happens." Hinton juxtaposed that risk with the potential money to be made from this technology, as one of the key tensions that led OpenAI co-founder Ilya Sutskever to recently leave the company. "The people interested in safety, like Ilya Sutskever, wanted significant resources to be spent on safety. People interested in profits, like Sam Altman, didn’t want to spend too many resources on that. “I think (Altman) would like big profits,” he added. Life after Google Having spent more than 50 years leading research in this area, Hinton long ago became a hot commodity in Silicon Valley, which ultimately landed him at Google. But last year, Hinton resigned his role at the company so he could speak more freely about the existential risks surrounding AI. "In the spring of 2023, I began to realize that these digital intelligences we’re building might just be a lot better form of intelligence than us and we had to take seriously the idea that they were going to get smarter than us." He says before Wall Street caught on to the AI opportunity, profits weren’t as much of a priority. “When I was at Google, they had a big lead in all of this stuff. And they were actually very responsible.” They weren’t doing that much work on safety, but they didn’t release this stuff because they had a very good reputation and they didn’t want to besmirch their reputation [with] chatbots saying prejudicial things … so they were very responsible with it. They used it internally, but didn’t release chatbots to the public even though they had them. But as soon as OpenAI used some of the Google research on transformers to make things as good as Google had… and actually tune them up slightly better and give them to Microsoft, then Google couldn’t help getting involved in an arm’s race.” Hinton added that skyrocketing stock market values — and competitive realities for these companies — is quickly lessening the industry’s focus on safety issues. "It makes it clear to the big companies that they want to go full speed ahead and there’s a big race on between Microsoft, Google and possibly Amazon, Nvidia and Meta. If any one of those (companies) pulled out, the others would keep going." That’s not to say he doesn’t believe tech leaders aren’t concerned about the risks. "Some people in industry — particularly Elon Musk — have said this is a real threat. I don’t agree with much of what he says but that aspect I do agree with," Hinton said. As for companies putting aside roughly a third of their computational resources for safety testing, Hinton is skeptical. But if they were collectively required to do so, he could see a path towards that happening. “I’m not sure they would object if all of them had to do it. It would be equally difficult for all of them. And I think that might be feasible." And in the end, that is what leads Hinton to believe that government intervention is the only solution, despite the fact that many countries are already competing with each other to ensure they respectively have an AI lead. "None of these countries want super intelligence to take over. And that will force them to coordinate." Related AI pioneer Geoffrey Hinton says the world is heeding warnings about the technology AI pioneers Hinton and Bengio call for more regulation in new proposal AI won't pose immediate existential threat but 'safety brakes' needed: Microsoft