URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20190511065650/http://insidetech.monster.com/training/articles/8114-15-ways-python-is-a-powerful-force-on-the-web

15 Ways Python Is a Powerful Force on the Web - InsideTech.com InsideTech.com The IT Career Community Career Resources Jobs Resume Home Sign in Join in News People Jobs Home Home Browse Articles News Feeds News Home Discussions Browse Articles Submit Article Quizzes IT Tools Home Browse Articles Salary Guide Quizzes Career Advice Quizzes Get a Job Home Discussions Browse Articles Submit Article Quizzes Print IT Tools >> Browse Articles >> Industry Trends +5 15 Ways Python Is a Powerful Force on the Web Tweet 5 Comments Darryl Taft/EWeek July 22, 2010 The Python programming language has gained popularity as one of the components of the LAMP (Linux, Apache, MySQL and Python/Perl/ PHP ) stack. Python has seen a resurgence in programmer interest, and dynamic languages such as Ruby and Python have emerged as alternatives to languages like Java and C#. And the popularity of software such as the Google App Engine, the Django Web framework and the Zope application server has made the language more attractive to developers. This following list looks at some of the things that make Python a standard for Web application development. Python: A Dynamic Programming Language Python is an interpreted, interactive, object-oriented programming language. It incorporates modules, exceptions, dynamic typing, very high-level dynamic data types and classes. Python Runs Nearly Anywhere Python is available for all major operating systems: Windows, Linux/Unix, OS/2, Mac, Amiga, among others. There are versions that run on Microsoft and Java platforms, and Nokia Series 60 cell phones. The same source code will run unchanged across all implementations. Python Has Deep Roots Python was conceived in the late 1980s, and its implementation was started in December 1989 by Guido van Rossum at CWI (Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica—the Center for Mathematics and Computer Science) in the Netherlands as a successor to the ABC programming language (itself inspired by SETL , the SET Language) capable of exception handling and interfacing with the Amoeba operating system. Van Rossum is Python’s principal author, and his continuing central role in deciding the direction of Python is reflected in the title given to him by the Python community: Benevolent Dictator for Life ( BDFL ). « Previous 1 2 3 4 Next » Flag as inappropriate Email to Friend InsideTech School Finder Save time in your search for a degree program. Use InsideTech's School Finder to locate schools online and in your area. Area of Interest: -- Please select -- Art and Design Business Communications Computer Technology and IT Cosmetology Criminal Justice, Law and Protection Culinary Arts Education and Teaching Engineering and Architecture Healthcare High School Completion Liberal Arts Nursing Psychology Trade and Vocational Degree of Interest: -- Please select -- Certificates and Diplomas Associate's Degree Bachelor's Degree Master's Degree Doctoral Degree Zip Code: Home News IT Tools Career Advice Get a Job About Us Advertising Terms of Use Privacy Policy Contact Help The Monster Network Computer Science/IT Training & Degrees Security Notice © 2019 InsideTech Loading... This widget requires JavaScript to run. Visit Site for more