URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20121101045354/http://wiki.python.org/moin/PythonForArtificialIntelligence

PythonForArtificialIntelligence - PythonInfo Wiki Search: PythonForArtificialIntelligence Documentation Wing IDE MovingToPyt...erLanguages PythonForAr...ntelligence FrontPage RecentChanges FindPage HelpContents PythonForAr...ntelligence Page Edit Comments Info Attachments More Actions: Raw Text Print View Delete Cache ------------------------ Check Spelling Like Pages Local Site Map ------------------------ Rename Page Delete Page ------------------------ ------------------------ Remove Spam Revert to this revision ------------------------ Load SlideShow User Login This page attempts to collect information and links pertaining to the practice of AI and Machine Learning in python. General AI AIMA - Python implementation of algorithms from Russell and Norvig's 'Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach' pyDatalog - Logic Programming engine in Python Machine Learning Orange - Open source data visualization and analysis for novice and experts. Data mining through visual programming or Python scripting. Components for machine learning. Extensions for bioinformatics and text mining. Packed with features for data analytics. PyBrain - PyBrain is a modular Machine Learning Library for Python. Its goal is to offer flexible, easy-to-use yet still powerful algorithms for Machine Learning Tasks and a variety of predefined environments to test and compare your algorithms. PyML - PyML is an interactive object oriented framework for machine learning written in Python. PyML focuses on SVMs and other kernel methods. It is supported on Linux and Mac OS X. MlPy - mlpy makes extensive use of NumPy to provide fast N-dimensional array manipulation and easy integration of C code. The GNU Scientific Library ( GSL) is also required. It provides high level procedures that support, with few lines of code, the design of rich Data Analysis Protocols (DAPs) for preprocessing, clustering, predictive classification, regression and feature selection. Methods are available for feature weighting and ranking, data resampling, error evaluation and experiment landscaping. Milk - Milk is a machine learning toolkit in Python. Its focus is on supervised classification with several classifiers available: SVMs (based on libsvm), k-NN, random forests, decision trees. It also performs feature selection. These classifiers can be combined in many ways to form different classification systems. scikit-learn - scikit-learn is a Python module integrating classic machine learning algorithms in the tightly-knit world of scientific Python packages (numpy, scipy, matplotlib). It aims to provide simple and efficient solutions to learning problems that are accessible to everybody and reusable in various contexts: machine-learning as a versatile tool for science and engineering. Shogun - The machine learning toolbox's focus is on large scale kernel methods and especially on Support Vector Machines (SVM) . It provides a generic SVM object interfacing to several different SVM implementations, among them the state of the art OCAS, Liblinear, LibSVM, SVMLight, SVMLin and GPDT. Each of the SVMs can be combined with a variety of kernels. The toolbox not only provides efficient implementations of the most common kernels, like the Linear, Polynomial, Gaussian and Sigmoid Kernel but also comes with a number of recent string kernels. SHOGUN is implemented in C++ and interfaces to Matlab(tm), R, Octave and Python and is proudly released as Machine Learning Open Source Software MDP-Toolkit - Modular toolkit for Data Processing (MDP) is a Python data processing framework. From the user’s perspective, MDP is a collection of supervised and unsupervised learning algorithms and other data processing units that can be combined into data processing sequences and more complex feed-forward network architectures. From the scientific developer’s perspective, MDP is a modular framework, which can easily be expanded. The implementation of new algorithms is easy and intuitive. The new implemented units are then automatically integrated with the rest of the library. The base of available algorithms is steadily increasing and includes signal processing methods (Principal Component Analysis, Independent Component Analysis, Slow Feature Analysis), manifold learning methods ([Hessian] Locally Linear Embedding), several classifiers, probabilistic methods (Factor Analysis, RBM), data pre-processing methods, and many others. LibSVM - LIBSVM is an integrated software for support vector classification, (C-SVC, nu-SVC), regression (epsilon-SVR, nu-SVR) and distribution estimation (one-class SVM). It supports multi-class classification. A Python interface is available by by default. Weka - Weka is a collection of machine learning algorithms for data mining tasks. The algorithms can either be applied directly to a dataset or called from your own Java code. Weka contains tools for data pre-processing, classification, regression, clustering, association rules, and visualization. It is also well-suited for developing new machine learning schemes. See here for a tutorial on using Weka from jython. Monte - Monte (python) is a Python framework for building gradient based learning machines, like neural networks, conditional random fields, logistic regression, etc. Monte contains modules (that hold parameters, a cost-function and a gradient-function) and trainers (that can adapt a module's parameters by minimizing its cost-function on training data). SOM - Self-Organizing Maps is a form of machine learning technique which employs unsupervised learning. It means that you don't need to explicitly tell the SOM about what to learn in the input data. It automatically learns the patterns in input data and organizes the data into different groups. Natural Language & Text Processing NLTK - Open source Python modules, linguistic data and documentation for research and development in natural language processing and text analytics, with distributions for Windows, Mac OSX and Linux. gensim - Gensim is a Python framework designed to automatically extract semantic topics from documents, as naturally and painlessly as possible. Gensim aims at processing raw, unstructured digital texts (“plain text”). The unsupervised algorithms in gensim, such as Latent Semantic Analysis, Latent Dirichlet Allocation or Random Projections, discover hidden (latent) semantic structure, based on word co-occurrence patterns within a corpus of training documents. Once these statistical patterns are found, any plain text documents can be succinctly expressed in the new, semantic representation, and queried for topical similarity against other documents and so on. Neural Networks neurolab - Neurolab is a simple and powerful Neural Network Library for Python. Contains based neural networks, train algorithms and flexible framework to create and explore other networks. It has the following features: pure python + numpy; API like Neural Network Toolbox (NNT) from MATLAB; interface to use train algorithms form scipy.optimize; flexible network configurations and learning algorithms; and a variety of supported types of Artificial Neural Network and learning algorithms. ffnet - ffnet is a fast and easy-to-use feed-forward neural network training solution for python. Many nice features are implemented: arbitrary network connectivity, automatic data normalization, very efficient (also parallel) training tools, network export to fortran code. FANN - Fast Artificial Neural Network Library is a free open source neural network library, which implements multilayer artificial neural networks in C with support for both fully connected and sparsely connected networks. Cross-platform execution in both fixed and floating point are supported. It includes a framework for easy handling of training data sets. It is easy to use, versatile, well documented, and fast. Bindings to more than 15 programming languages are available. An easy to read introduction article and a reference manual accompanies the library with examples and recommendations on how to use the library. Several graphical user interfaces are also available for the library. bpnn.py - Written by Neil Schemenauer, bpnn.py is used by an IBM article entitled "An introduction to neural networks". PyAnn - A Python framework to build artificial neural networks Robotics Pyro - Pyro stands for Python Robotics. The goal of the project is to provide a programming environment for easily exploring advanced topics in artificial intelligence and robotics without having to worry about the low-level details of the underlying hardware. That is not to say that Pyro is just a toy. In fact, Pyro is used for real robotics research as well as courseware. Pyro is written in Python. Python is an interpreted language, which means that you can experiment interactively with your robot programs. In addition to being an environment, Pyro is also a collection of object classes in Python. Because Pyro abstracts all of the underlying hardware details, it can be used for experimenting with several different types of mobile robots and robot simulators. Until now, it has been necessary to learn very different and specific control languages for different mobile robots, particularly those manufactured by different companies. Now, a single language can be used to program many different robots, allowing code to be shared across platforms as well as allowing students to experiment with different robots while learning a single language and environment. PythonForArtificialIntelligence (last edited 2012-07-19 21:16:29 by PierreCarbonnelle ) MoinMoin Powered Python Powered GPL licensed Valid HTML 4.01 Page.execute = 0.006s getACL = 0.002s init = 0.001s load_multi_cfg = 0.000s run = 0.063s send_page = 0.058s send_page_content = 0.007s total = 0.064s