URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20210307165521/https://www.theregister.com/2017/01/05/googles_grumpy_makes_python_go/

Google's Grumpy code makes Python Go • The Register Devops Google's Grumpy code makes Python Go With a transcompiling tool, YouTube aims to overcome Python's limitations Thomas Claburn in San Francisco Thu 5 Jan 2017 // 00:20 UTC Share Copy Google on Wednesday introduced an open-source project called Grumpy to translate Python code into Go programs. The company's front-end server for YouTube and its YouTube API are mainly written in Python, and run on CPython 2.7, as opposed to other implementations (Jython, PyPy, or IronPython). The issue for Google is performance. Python in its various forms doesn't excel at concurrency – running multiple, independent threads at the same time – explains YouTube engineer Dylan Trotter in a blog post . Grumpy is a source code transcompiler and runtime. It compiles Python source code into Go source code that gets compiled into native code rather than bytecode that requires a VM. The compiled Go code makes calls to the Grumpy runtime, which is a Go library that functions similarly to the Python C API. Trotter characterizes Grumpy as experimental, but that doesn't mean support for Python 3 is forthcoming as the project matures. In response to a request for Python 3 support, Trotter on GitHub said, "We have a large Python 2.7 codebase so that's what we've been focused on. I definitely would like to support Python 3. It's just a bunch of work." He suggested those interested in Python 3 support should fork the project. One possible rationale for creating Grumpy may be the planned end-of-life date for Python 2.7 in 2020 . Rather than trying to update all its Python code from version 2.7 to 3 – which has been slow to catch on – Google appears to be planning to convert at least some of its Python code to Go over the next few years. Google didn't immediately respond to a request for comment. In a post to Hacker News, Trotter offered his thoughts on the matter. "The idea is to continue to write code in Python," he said. "The transcompiled code is not suitable for working with directly. That said, there is the possibility of rewriting bits and pieces in Go (eg, performance-critical stuff) and then call into it from Python. Sort of a hybrid approach." Three years hence and beyond, that hybrid approach can be expected to include a lot more Go code, provided Google's developers become as proficient with Go as they are with Python. Go, as Trotter suggests, has performance advantages over Python (though benchmarks can vary significantly, depending upon optimizations and alternative implementations). It also has brand advantages: Go was developed at Google and the company's willingness to eat its own dogfood, so to speak, could convince other organizations that Go is the way to go. Google doesn't benefit directly from Go adoption, but broader usage will deepen the talent pool of Go developers, who could in time end up working at Google or improving Go libraries that Google uses. There's also the opportunity cost imposed on competitors – the more time developers spend with Go, the less they have to spend with languages backed by Apple, Microsoft, Mozilla, Oracle, or others. ® Get our Tech Resources MORE Programming Development Corrections Send us news 55 Comments Get our DevOps newsletter Most Read Brave buys a search engine, promises no tracking, no profiling – and may even offer a paid-for, no-ad version Linus Torvalds went six days without electricity, swears smaller 5.12 kernel is co-incidental Flagship Chinese chipmaker collapses before it makes a single chip or opens a factory After spending $45bn on 5G licences, Verizon tells customers to turn off 5G to save battery life Rookie's code couldn't have been so terrible that it made a supermarket spontaneously combust... right? Keep Reading Python Package Index nukes 3,653 malicious libraries uploaded soon after security shortcoming highlighted Unauthorized versions of CuPy and other projects flood PyPI Python swallows Java to become second-most popular programming language... according to this index Coincidentally, Python creator Guido van Rossum joins Microsoft Python 2 bows out after epic transition. And there was much applause because you've all moved to version 3, right? Uh, right? Version 2.7.18 is the last official Python 2 release, but it'll live on Need to build a Big Data app but can't be bothered to learn Python or Scala? Good news: .NET for Apache Spark is here Stay safe and warm in your C# cocoon Can't afford an AI-accelerating Nvidia Jetson Nano? Open-source emulator lets you prototype Python apps for it Get a feel for the gizmo's programming environment Class move, Java. Coding language slips to third place behind Python in latest popularity contest Rust enters the top 20, and yes, JavaScript is still number one Snakes on a wane: Python 2 development is finally frozen in time, version 3 slithers on I'm not quite dead, mutters 2.7 as rigor mortis sets in Happy birthday, Python, you're 30 years old this week: Easy to learn, and the right tool at the right time Feature Popular programming language, at the top of its game, still struggles to please everyone Tech Resources 5 Things To Consider When Choosing An APM Tool The goal: to reach a state of observability where the whole picture is detailed and constantly up-to-date — with monitoring and alerts that take it all into consideration. Breakthrough Efficiency in NLP Model Deployment As Natural Language Processing (NLP) models evolve to become ever bigger, GPU performance and capability degrades at an exponential rate, leaving organizations across a range of industries in need of higher quality language processing, but increasingly constrained by today’s solutions. Four Key Tips From Incident Response Experts While nothing can fully alleviate the stress of dealing with an attack, knowing what to do in advance will help you defend your organization. Expediting IT in the Wake of Ever-increasing Demands and Problematic Talent Shortages IT innovation comes in waves. Cloud IT disrupted the last decade, and the next wave of disruption will likely center on intelligent infrastructure. ABOUT US Who we are Under the hood Contact us Advertise with us MORE CONTENT Latest News Popular Stories Forums Whitepapers Webinars SITUATION PUBLISHING The Next Platform DevClass Blocks and Files Continuous Lifecycle London M-cubed The Register - Independent news and views for the tech community. Part of Situation Publishing SIGN UP TO OUR DAILY NEWSLETTER Subscribe Biting the hand that feeds IT © 1998–2021 Do not sell my personal information Cookies Privacy Ts&Cs