URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20240910112401/https://techcrunch.com/2024/04/09/google-open-sources-tools-to-support-ai-model-development/

Google open sources tools to support AI model development | TechCrunch AI Google open sources tools to support AI model development Kyle Wiggers 5:00 AM PDT • April 9, 2024 Comment Image Credits: Frederic Lardinois/TechCrunch In a typical year, Cloud Next — one of Google’s two major annual developer conferences, the other being I/O — almost exclusively features managed and otherwise closed source, gated-behind-locked-down-APIs products and services. But this year, whether to foster developer goodwill or advance its ecosystem ambitions (or both), Google debuted a number of open source tools primarily aimed at supporting generative AI projects and infrastructure. The first, MaxDiffusion , which Google actually quietly released in February, is a collection of reference implementations of various diffusion models — models like the image generator Stable Diffusion — that run on XLA devices. “XLA” stands for Accelerated Linear Algebra, an admittedly awkward acronym referring to a technique that optimizes and speeds up specific types of AI workloads, including fine-tuning and serving. Google’s own tensor processing units (TPUs) are XLA devices, as are recent Nvidia GPUs. Beyond MaxDiffusion, Google’s launching JetStream , a new engine to run generative AI models — specifically text-generating models (so not Stable Diffusion). Currently limited to supporting TPUs with GPU compatibility supposedly coming in the future, JetStream offers up to 3x higher “performance per dollar” for models like Google’s own Gemma 7B and Meta’s Llama 2 , Google claims. “As customers bring their AI workloads to production, there’s an increasing demand for a cost-efficient inference stack that delivers high performance,” Mark Lohmeyer, Google Cloud’s GM of compute and machine learning infrastructure, wrote in a blog post shared with TechCrunch. “JetStream helps with this need … and includes optimizations for popular open models such as Llama 2 and Gemma.” Now, “3x” improvement is quite a claim to make, and it’s not exactly clear how Google arrived at that figure. Using which generation of TPU? Compared to which baseline engine? And how’s “performance” being defined here, anyway? I’ve asked Google all these questions and will update this post if I hear back. Second-to-last on the list of Google’s open source contributions are new additions to MaxText , Google’s collection of text-generating AI models targeting TPUs and Nvidia GPUs in the cloud. MaxText now includes Gemma 7B, OpenAI’s GPT-3 (the predecessor to GPT-4 ), Llama 2 and models from AI startup Mistral — all of which Google says can be customized and fine-tuned to developers’ needs. “ We’ve heavily optimized [the models’] performance on TPUs and also partnered closely with Nvidia to optimize performance on large GPU clusters,” Lohmeyer said. “These improvements maximize GPU and TPU utilization, leading to higher energy efficiency and cost optimization.” Finally, Google’s collaborated with Hugging Face, the AI startup, to create Optimum TPU , which provides tooling to bring certain AI workloads to TPUs. The goal is to reduce the barrier to entry for getting generative AI models onto TPU hardware, according to Google — in particular text-generating models. But at present, Optimum TPU is a bit bare-bones. The only model it works with is Gemma 7B. And Optimum TPU doesn’t yet support training generative models on TPUs — only running them. Google’s promising improvements down the line. More TechCrunch Get the industry’s biggest tech news Explore all newsletters TechCrunch Daily News Every weekday and Sunday, you can get the best of TechCrunch’s coverage. Startups Weekly Startups are the core of TechCrunch, so get our best coverage delivered weekly. TechCrunch Fintech The latest Fintech news and analysis, delivered every Tuesday. TechCrunch Mobility TechCrunch Mobility is your destination for transportation news and insight. Email address (required) Subscribe By submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice . Tags AI , Cloud Next , Enterprise , Enterprise , Generative AI , Google , google cloud , Google Cloud Next , Google Cloud Next 2024 , open source Biotech & Health Formo gets investors’ mouths watering with Koji protein-based animal-free cheese Natasha Lomas 13 mins ago A love of food — and, well, cheese — has landed German fermentation startup Formo‘s co-founder Roman Plewka and its team a hefty $61 million Series B round to keep… Startups Swiggy weighs increasing its IPO size by $150M, aiming to raise up to $1.4B Manish Singh 26 mins ago Indian food delivery startup Swiggy is considering increasing the fresh issue component of its initial public offering by $150 million, aiming to raise a total of up to $1.4 billion… Apps Sri Mandir helps Hindus visit sacred temples and offer donations virtually, from their phones Jagmeet Singh 58 mins ago AppsForBharat, the startup behind Hindu devotional app Sri Mandir, has raised $18 million to penetrate into global markets and add new features. Transportation Seattle Cybertruck became fleeting tourist destination Connie Loizos 2 hours ago You could argue whether Cybertruck owners crave attention, but attention they receive, often by critics poking fun at the vehicles. People seem to particularly delight at Cybertruck mishaps, as when… Biotech & Health Heart disease is the world’s biggest killer — this Cambridge Uni spinout is using AI to find new treatments Paul Sawers 2 hours ago Cambridge University spinout CardiaTec is striving to tackle cardiovascular diseases, one of the world’s leading causes of death, with AI. Media & Entertainment Online, led by social media, overtakes TV as the most popular source of news in the UK, Ofcom says Ingrid Lunden 6 hours ago Online platforms have now overtaken TV for the first time as the most popular resource for news among adult consumers, at 71% versus 70%, according to new research. AI Apple upgrades watchOS with AI-powered features, including translation Kyle Wiggers 6 hours ago Apple has announced new features for the latest version of watchOS, watchOS 11, including translation and an upgraded Smart Stack. Space TechCrunch Space: Boeing’s Starliner returns to Earth Aria Alamalhodaei 8 hours ago Hello and welcome back to TechCrunch Space. Let’s dive into the news! Want to reach out with a tip? Email Aria at aria.techcrunch@gmail.com or send a message on Signal at… Featured Article iPhone 16, Apple Intelligence, AirPods 4 and more: Everything revealed at Apple Event 2024 Apple’s lineup of announcements echoed many of the anticipated hardware reveals, including the new iPhone 16, AirPods 4, the Apple Watch Series 10 and more. Morgan Little 9 hours ago Hardware Why Apple added yet another button to the iPhone 16 Brian Heater 9 hours ago With another new iPhone comes another new iPhone button: Camera Control, which was announced at Apple’s “Glowtime” event on Monday. AI Audible recruits voice actors to train audiobook-generating AI Kyle Wiggers 10 hours ago Audible, Amazon’s audiobook business, on Monday announced that it’ll use AI trained on professional narrators’ voices to generate new audiobook recordings. A select, U.S.-based cohort of audiobook narrators will be… Climate Climate change was a lot less prominent in this year’s iPhone event Tim De Chant 10 hours ago The lack of climate announcement’s at Apple’s annual event shows just how hard meaningful progress on carbon emissions can be, even for one of the world’s most valuable companies. Enterprise Confluent acquires streaming data startup WarpStream Frederic Lardinois 10 hours ago Confluent plans to use WarpStream’s cloud-native solution to fill out its portfolio by offering a new service (Confluent WarpStream) that can sit in between its fully-managed Confluent Cloud and self-managed… Hardware Apple sets lower iPhone 16 Pro prices in India Manish Singh 10 hours ago The iPhone 16 Pro and Pro Max models now start at 119,900 rupees ($1,428) and 144,900 rupees ($1,725) respectively, compared to their iPhone 15 Pro counterparts which were priced at… Apps Here are all the devices compatible with iOS 18 Lauren Forristal 10 hours ago iOS 18 will be available in the fall as a free software update. Gadgets All the iPhone 16 models compared Ivan Mehta 11 hours ago All the iPhones now have an action button and a dedicated camera button. Apps What is Apple Intelligence, when is it coming and who will get it? Brian Heater 11 hours ago Apple Intelligence was designed to leverage things that generative AI already does well, like text and image generation, to improve upon existing features. AI Here’s the full list of 35 US AI startups that have raised $100M or more in 2024 Rebecca Szkutak 11 hours ago In the first half of 2024 alone, more than $35.5 billion was invested into AI startups globally. Hardware Apple will make iOS 18 available to all users on September 16 Ivan Mehta 11 hours ago You will get the iOS 18 update if you have an iPhone XR or later, or iPhone SE (second gen) or later. Apps Apple to release AI-focused macOS Sequoia on September 16 Manish Singh 12 hours ago The swift macOS Sequoia release deviates from Apple’s usual late September or October timeline for desktop OS updates. Hardware Apple’s Voice Memos app will soon let you layer vocals on top of music Kyle Wiggers 12 hours ago When the upgraded Voice Memos app rolls out, you’ll be able to sing over a track you recorded earlier — a guitar track, say — by tapping on a new… AI With Apple Intelligence, iPhone users will finally get a better Siri Sarah Perez 12 hours ago While consumers won’t get the full impact of the Siri upgrade until Apple Intelligence launches, Apple promises it will upend the user experience Hardware Apple’s iPhone 16 Pro models arrive with 6.3- and 6.9-inch displays, larger battery and new A18 Pro chip Brian Heater 12 hours ago The 16 Pro starts at $999, while the Pro Max runs $1,119 and up. Preorder opens Friday. The handsets start shipping on September 20. AI AI-powered visual search comes to the iPhone Kyle Wiggers 12 hours ago Visual intelligence will launch along with other Apple Intelligence features in beta in October for U.S. English language users. Gadgets Apple adds a dedicated camera button on iPhone 16 Ivan Mehta 12 hours ago Pressing the button for the first time will open the camera app. You press it to take a photo and press and hold to start a video recording. Hardware Apple announces its new A18 and A18 Pro iPhone chips Frederic Lardinois 12 hours ago Today, Apple is bringing the new A18 chips to the standard iPhone and also launching a more powerful A18 Pro for its Pro models. Hardware Apple updates AirPods Max headphones with a USB-C port and new colors Maxwell Zeff 12 hours ago The updated version of Apple’s AirPods Max are still $549, and can be preordered Monday. With a USB-C port, the updated AirPods Max will now match the rest of Apple’s… Hardware Apple’s iPhone 16 arrives with AI features and devoted camera button, starting at $799 Brian Heater 12 hours ago Apple Intelligence was the star of this show, as the new iPhone 16 line joins last year’s iPhone 15 Pro models as the only members of the line that can… AI Apple says AirPods Pro 2 can be used as ‘clinical-grade’ hearing aids Kyle Wiggers 13 hours ago Both the hearing aid feature for AirPods Pro 2 and the hearing test for iOS 18 will launch this fall via a software update in over 100 countries and regions. Hardware Apple is adding a sleep apnea detection feature to the Apple Watch Series 10, 9 and Ultra 2 Aisha Malik 13 hours ago At its It’s Glowtime event on Monday, Apple announced that it’s adding a new Apple Watch feature that can alert users to sleep apnea, a health condition that causes you…