URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20190620000050/https://stackoverflow.com/questions/5033906/in-python-should-i-use-else-after-a-return-in-an-if-block

coding style - In Python, should I use else after a return in an if block? - Stack Overflow Stack Overflow Log in Sign up current community Stack Overflow help chat Meta Stack Overflow your communities Sign up or log in to customize your list. more stack exchange communities company blog Tour Start here for a quick overview of the site Help Center Detailed answers to any questions you might have Meta Discuss the workings and policies of this site About Us Learn more about Stack Overflow the company Business Learn more about hiring developers or posting ads with us By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understand our Cookie Policy , Privacy Policy , and our Terms of Service . In Python, should I use else after a return in an if block? [closed] Ask Question 19 1 First, I couldn't find an answer to this in PEP 8 . That doesn't mean it isn't in there. Feel free to point me at it. Which style do you prefer? The first one : if spam: # Do stuff. return eggs else: # Maybe do other stuff. return parrots or the second one : if spam: # Do stuff. return eggs # Maybe do other stuff. return parrots python coding-style share | improve this question edited Feb 17 '11 at 20:47 community wiki 5 revs nmichaels closed as not constructive by corsiKa , BlueRaja - Danny Pflughoeft , Helen , Ben Voigt , marcog Feb 19 '11 at 19:02 As it currently stands, this question is not a good fit for our Q&A format. We expect answers to be supported by facts, references, or expertise, but this question will likely solicit debate, arguments, polling, or extended discussion. If you feel that this question can be improved and possibly reopened, visit the help center for guidance. If this question can be reworded to fit the rules in the help center , please edit the question . 13 @closers: I understand the subjective , though I did try not to be and argumentative . But off topic? A coding style question? – nmichaels Feb 17 '11 at 20:48 If there was a "bikeshed problem" category, I'd vote to close your question as such. Lacking that, I felt compelled to answer it instead :) – Rafał Dowgird Feb 17 '11 at 21:02 I personally use the 2nd style if the else block is long. It keeps the code flatter and easier to read. – Ondra Žižka Sep 29 '12 at 10:21 add a comment | 8 Answers 8 active oldest votes 12 It depends, if you would return parrots, when you do not return eggs, then the first one is more clear. But if you are trying to catch an error or something like that, the second one is better. share | improve this answer answered Feb 17 '11 at 20:05 community wiki Omid Kamangar add a comment | -8 I don't know python, but I do : return spam if eggs else parrots Edit : I didn't notice the Do stuff part. In that case, I would create another method or function (whatever it is called in python) for each branch. share | improve this answer edited Feb 18 '11 at 23:23 community wiki 2 revs fastcodejava 4 It's spelled: return eggs if spam else parrots in Python. – S.Lott Feb 17 '11 at 20:03 11 You left out the #do stuff s. Plus, you're right about not knowing python. – Wooble Feb 17 '11 at 20:03 add a comment | 0 I think it depends on the "do stuff" part. Both are acceptable. share | improve this answer answered Feb 17 '11 at 20:48 community wiki SnowBallz add a comment | 5 The second one. The same applies not only to return but also to break and continue statements. The else and the consequent indentation are eye-irritating and a waste of space. share | improve this answer answered Feb 17 '11 at 20:09 community wiki John Machin add a comment | 3 Neither! if spam: # Do Stuff result= eggs else: # Maybe do other stuff result= parrots return result share | improve this answer edited Feb 17 '11 at 20:08 community wiki 2 revs S.Lott 13 Symptom of excessive exposure to Pascal in infancy :-) – John Machin Feb 17 '11 at 20:15 3 @John Machin: Guilty as charged. And too much formal theory. It's easier to add logging and formal assertions before the return . – S.Lott Feb 17 '11 at 20:16 8 I've never liked One Entry, One Exit style of programming. If you are done with your method and have exactly what you need to return... RETURN! I feel the stack plumps up with wasted result variables. – Corey Ogburn Feb 17 '11 at 20:45 1 Some logging and assertions can be put in a decorator. Others not so easily, so good point. – Rafał Dowgird Feb 18 '11 at 8:17 add a comment | 5 It doesn't really matter. If you really need reasons for picking one, use the one that best conveys the reasons behind the code. The first one if both cases are somehow similar or equally important. The second one if you usually return parrots but eggs is a special case. share | improve this answer answered Feb 17 '11 at 20:07 community wiki Rafał Dowgird add a comment | 7 The second one! Less is more, and more is better. share | improve this answer answered Feb 17 '11 at 20:00 community wiki nmichaels add a comment | 8 The first one! Explicit is better than implicit. share | improve this answer answered Feb 17 '11 at 19:59 community wiki nmichaels add a comment | Not the answer you're looking for? Browse other questions tagged python coding-style or ask your own question . asked 8 years, 4 months ago viewed 4,465 times active 8 years, 4 months ago Blog Adios to Unfriendly Badges: Ahoy, Lifejacket and Lifeboat Featured on Meta Unicorn Meta Zoo #4: What makes for a healthy community? Tag synonym dashboard 2.0 Data science time! June 2019 and the Tumbleweed badge Linked 1 if else return practice 1 Python: Do I have to use else statements (unless mandated by code)? 7 Preferred Python (or any language, really) style: Should else be used when if returns? Related 4284 Calling an external command in Python 5168 What are metaclasses in Python? 2698 Finding the index of an item given a list containing it in Python 3119 What is the difference between Python's list methods append and extend? 3607 How can I safely create a nested directory? 944 How to return multiple values from a function? 5255 Does Python have a ternary conditional operator? 2409 How to get the current time in Python 3603 Does Python have a string 'contains' substring method? 2348 Catch multiple exceptions in one line (except block) Hot Network Questions If plants "alternate generations" between sporophytes and gametophytes, why don't we say the same of humans? Greeting with "Ho" Why is prior to creation called holy? How do I handle a table mixing up the DM and the players' roles too often? What is "industrial ethernet"? Why do some professors with PhDs leave their professorships to teach high school? "How can you guarantee that you won't change/quit job after just couple of months?" How to respond? What does it mean to "control target player"? Is there a term for the belief that "if it's legal, it's moral"? What does "play with your toy’s toys" mean? Why do textbooks often include the solutions to odd or even numbered problems but not both? Loss of power when I remove item from the outlet Array initialization optimization How to find the last non zero element in every column throughout dataframe? Understanding the reasoning of the woman who agreed with King Solomon to "cut the baby in half" Non-flat partitions of a set Who are the remaining King/Queenslayers? Is it damaging to turn off a small fridge for two days every week? How does a blind passenger not die, if driver becomes unconscious Do I have to explain the mechanical superiority of the player-character within the fiction of the game? Dates on degrees don’t make sense – will people care? Unusual mail headers, evidence of an attempted attack. Have I been pwned? Improving triangulation on AutoCAD-generated stl files Is a single radon-daughter atom in air a solid? more hot questions lang-py Stack Overflow works best with JavaScript enabled