URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20241005170152/https://www.wsj.com/business/energy-oil/three-mile-islands-nuclear-plant-to-reopen-help-power-microsofts-ai-centers-aebfb3c8?mod=Searchresults_pos1&page=1

Three Mile Island’s Nuclear Plant to Reopen, Help Power Microsoft’s AI Centers - WSJ Skip to Main Content The Wall Street Journal English Edition Edition English 中文 (Chinese) 日本語 (Japanese) Print Edition Video Audio Latest Headlines More More Other Products from WSJ Buy Side from WSJ The Journal Collection WSJ Shop WSJ Wine The Wall Street Journal Advertisement This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com. https://www.wsj.com/business/energy-oil/three-mile-islands-nuclear-plant-to-reopen-help-power-microsofts-ai-centers-aebfb3c8 Three Mile Island’s Nuclear Plant to Reopen, Help Power Microsoft’s AI Centers The 20-year deal with Constellation Energy would kick-start the site of the nation’s worst nuclear accident By Jennifer Hiller Updated Sept. 20, 2024 12:36 pm ET Share Resize Listen (2 min) Three Mile Island will be renamed the Crane Clean Energy Center. Photo: ANDREW CABALLERO-REYNOLDS/Agence France-Press/Getty Images A deal between Constellation Energy CEG 0.09 % increase; green up pointing triangle and Microsoft MSFT -0.76 % decrease; red down pointing triangle will restart Pennsylvania’s Three Mile Island, the site of the country’s worst nuclear power accident, to help power the tech giant’s growing artificial intelligence ambitions. Under the agreement, Constellation would revive the plant’s undamaged reactor, which was too costly to run and closed in 2019, and sell the power to Microsoft. The plan signals the gargantuan amount of power needed for data centers for AI, along with the tech industry’s thirst for a carbon-free, round-the-clock electricity source needed to meet climate goals. Copyright © 2024 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8 Videos What's News Top stories chosen by WSJ editors Most Popular News Recommended for You Top Stories Most Popular Recommended for You Most Popular news Most Popular opinion Recommended Videos Copyright © 2024 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com.