URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20231125045938/https://analyticsindiamag.com/a-complete-guide-to-shap-shapley-additive-explanations-for-practitioners/

A Complete Guide to SHAP - SHAPley Additive exPlanations for Practitioners Skip to content Menu Search Search Close this search box. Menu Published on December 25, 2021 In Mystery Vault A Complete Guide to SHAP – SHAPley Additive exPlanations for Practitioners SHAP or SHAPley Additive exPlanations is a visualization tool that can be used for explaining the prediction of any model by computing the contribution of each feature to the prediction by Yugesh Verma There are many machine learning models which are very accurate and high performing while making predictions. One of the limitations with these models we always find is that we can not explain the quality of outcomes produced by them. There is always a need to make the outcomes from the model more explainable. In this article, we are going to introduce a tool “SHAP (SHAPley Additive exPlanations)” that can help us in making the outcomes of the machine learning models more explainable. The major points to be discussed in this article are listed below. The most comprehensive Repository of Python Libraries for Data Science >> Table of Contents Subscribe to our Newsletter Join our editors every weekday evening as they steer you through the most significant news of the day, introduce you to fresh perspectives, and provide unexpected moments of joy Email Sign up Your newsletter subscriptions are subject to AIM Privacy Policy and Terms and Conditions. What is SHAP? Installing SHAP Simple Implementation of SHAP Explaining Models With SHAPely Values Examining the Model Coefficients Partial Dependence Plots Waterfall Plot What is SHAP? SHAP or SHAPley Additive exPlanations is a visualization tool that can be used for making a machine learning model more explainable by visualizing its output. It can be used for explaining the prediction of any model by computing the contribution of each feature to the prediction. It is a combination of various tools like lime, SHAPely sampling values, DeepLift, QII, and many more. One of the main components of the SHAP tool is SHAPley values because using it, SHAP connects optimal credit allocation with local explanations. When we talk about the SHAPley values we can consider them as a method that can tell how to accurately distribute the contribution by the features, among the features. One of the good things about the SHAP is, it supports modelling procedures followed by using libraries like SciKit-Learn , PySpark , TensorFlow , Keras, PyTorch , and many more. These are the widely used libraries for data modelling and the basic problem with these libraries is that model outcomes are not so explainable. Using SHAP, we can make outcomes more understandable for users who are not so knowledgeable about the outcomes of machine learning models. With this ability of SHAP, we can also use it for data visualization. Let’s start with the installation process of the SHAP tool in our environment. Installing SHAP We can install the SHAP tool by using the following pip command: !pip install SHAP Output: So as we have installed the SHAP tool, now we can start by making models with simple data. Simple Implementation of SHAP As we have discussed, that we can utilize the SHAP tool with many modelling libraries, in this section, we will look at how simply we can use this tool to make the outcomes from simple models more explainable. Let’s start by loading data. With the SHAP tool installation, we also get some ready datasets with this package which we will use here. In this article, we are going to use the IRIS dataset for classification. Loading the data import SHAP X,y = SHAP.datasets.iris(display=True) Splitting the data from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split X_train,X_test = train_test_split(X,test_size=0.2, random_state=0) Y_train,Y_test = train_test_split(y, test_size=0.2, random_state=0) Checking the data from google.colab import data_table data_table.enable_dataframe_formatter() X_train Output: For classification, we are using the SVM model from the SK-Learn library. Importing and fitting model from sklearn.svm import SVC from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score svc = SVC(kernel='linear', probability=True) svc.fit(X_train, Y_train) y_pred = svc.predict(X_test) accuracy_score(Y_test, y_pred) Output: Here we have got an accuracy of 100%. Now we can use the SHAP tool for explaining the prediction in the test set using visualization. Explaining the prediction using an explainer explainer = SHAP.KernelExplainer(svc.predict_proba, X_train) SHAP_values = explainer.SHAP_values(X_test) Plotting the prediction SHAP.initjs() SHAP.force_plot(explainer.expected_value[0], SHAP_values[0], X_test) Output: We can move the cursor to see the values in the output. Here I am just posting the picture of the output. Here we have used the force plot to plot outcomes from the model. By visualizing the force plot we can understand the impact of every feature on the prediction by the model even for a specific instance of the data. We can say that the force plot is an explanation of feature importance based on the game theory method, i.e., SHAPley values. The Force plot shows the influence of each feature on the current prediction. Values in the blue colour can be considered as the values that have a positive influence on the prediction whereas values in the red colour have a negative influence on the prediction. Here in the above example, we have seen a general idea of applying the SHAP tool to the models. Let’s have a look at the explanation of the SHAPe values which we have created in the modelling in the last section. Explaining Models With SHAPely Values In this section of the article, we will see how we can make a machine learning model more explainable using the SHAPley values. For this purpose, we will use a simple linear regression model on the IRIS data set which we have already used in the last section of the article. Let’s start with fighting the model on the previously loaded data. model = sklearn.linear_model.LinearRegression() model.fit(X, y) Output: Examining the Model Coefficients One of the most common procedures of explaining linear model success is to find out the level of coefficient learned by the model for each feature. Since the SHAPley values, consider that every value is important from the data for the output. By examining the coefficient we can tell how much the output can change if we change the feature. Here, what we have done is a traditional method to examine the model. We can say that the petal width feature from the dataset is the most influencing feature. Since we have the SHAP tool we can make a clearer picture using the partial dependence plot. Partial Dependence Plots The importance of the feature can be found by knowing the impact of the feature on the output or by knowing the distribution of the feature. So if we can plot the model and the distribution in a single plot, it would become more beneficial and informative for us. Let’s see how we can do this. SHAP.plots.partial_dependence( "petal length (cm)", model.predict, X50, ice=False, model_expected_value=True, feature_expected_value=True ) Output: Here on the X-axis, we can see the histogram of the distribution of the data, and the blue line in the plot is the average value of the model output which passes through a centre point which is also the intersection point of the expected value lines. Using this plot we can read the SHAP value which can be considered as the SHAPley values that are applied to any conditional expectation function of a model. For example, we can extract a few values from the data and use them as a sample for background distribution. Let’s say we have extracted 50 instances. Using which we can make the SHAP values. Computing the SHAP values X50 = SHAP.utils.sample(X, 50) explainer = SHAP.Explainer(model.predict, X50) SHAP_values = explainer(X) Partial dependence plot sample_ind = 18 SHAP.partial_dependence_plot( "petal length (cm)", model.predict, X50, model_expected_value=True, feature_expected_value=True, ice=False, SHAP_values=SHAP_values[sample_ind:sample_ind+1,:] Output: Here we can see that a close correspondence between the partial dependence plot and SHAP value. It means that we have plotted a mean-centred version of the partial dependence plot for that feature. Let’s check the distribution of the SHAP value. SHAP.plots.scatter(SHAP_values[:,"petal length (cm)"]) Output: This is a clearer outcome where we can see that the SHAP values distribution is similar to the distribution of the portal length distribution. Waterfall Plot These SHAP values of all input features will always be summed up to the difference between the expected output from the model and that is how the output from the current model for the prediction becomes explained. We can see it through the waterfall plot. SHAP.plots.waterfall(SHAP_values[sample_ind]) Output: By seeing in the waterfall plot, we can imagine how we get the predicted values with SHAP. Final Words In this article, we have seen what is SHAP tool, and how we can simply apply this to our models to make the outcome from the model more explainable. Along with this, we have also seen how we can use the SHAP values to improve the explainability of any model. References Github of SHAP Link for the codes Download our Mobile App Yugesh is a graduate in automobile engineering and worked as a data analyst intern. He completed several Data Science projects. He has a strong interest in Deep Learning and writing blogs on data science and machine learning. MachineHack | AI Hackathons, Coding & Learning Host Hackathons & Recruit Great Data Talent! Visit MachineHack AIMResearch Pioneering advanced AI market research With a decade of experience under our belt, we are transforming how businesses use AI & data-driven insights to succeed. Visit AIM Research The Gold Standard for Recognizing Excellence in Data Science and Tech Workplaces With Best Firm Certification, you can effortlessly delve into the minds of your employees, unveil invaluable perspectives, and gain distinguished acclaim for fostering an exceptional company culture. Get Certified AIM Leaders Council World’s Biggest Community Exclusively For Senior Executives In Data Science And Analytics. Join! 3 Ways to Join our Community Telegram group Discover special offers, top stories, upcoming events, and more. Join Telegram Discord Server Stay Connected with a larger ecosystem of data science and ML Professionals Join Discord Community Subscribe to our Daily newsletter Get our daily awesome stories & videos in your inbox Subscribe MOST POPULAR Generate Results Beyond the Boardroom: A Data Leader’s Guide to Planning, Building, and Launching Generative AI Projects How can organizations tap into these windows of opportunity to create tangible value for Rust Provides the Ultimate Security Against Hackers Rust, acclaimed for its robust security features, is rapidly becoming the preferred programming language Altman Gets Chatty as Musk Goes Grok Altman builds Grok with a single prompt, while Musk calls OpenAI going closed door YouTube Joins The Irresponsible AI Club A change in long-standing policies is inevitable but the big tech does whatever floats Google Doesn’t Know How to Make Money with Generative AI The fact that Google has failed to diversify its revenue stream, despite its myriad Not a Good Time to Be a Tech Entrepreneur Consider yourself lucky if you have a steady job. Salesforce Ushers CRM Innovation with Generative AI The company grew at 24% YoY in Q2FY24 in the APAC region, with the 7 NVIDIA Announcements Made at Microsoft Ignite 2023 “Our partnership with NVIDIA spans every layer of the Copilot stack — from silicon How Google is Crafting Tangible Impact in the Real World From combating the climate crisis to revolutionising lifescience, the big tech is driving innovation An Ethical Valve for GenAI Pipeline What are the ingredients that should be considered while creating an effective ethical valve? Our mission is to bring about better-informed and more conscious decisions about technology through authoritative, influential, and trustworthy journalism. Shape The Future of Tech CONTACT US ⟶ © Analytics India Magazine Pvt Ltd & AIM Media House LLC 2023 Terms of use Privacy Policy Copyright THE BIGGEST AI CONFERENCE FOR DEVELOPERS IN INDIA Early Bird Passed to Expire on Friday Book Passes Name Email Phone Organization Designation DOWNLOAD