URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20180424202350/https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2017/04/uncanny-valley-digital-assistants/523806

Chatbots Have Entered the Uncanny Valley - The Atlantic Chatbots Have Entered the Uncanny Valley When virtual assistants almost pass as human, they only seem more robotic. Jeff Chiu / AP Most Popular The Reinvention of America James Fallows Apr 23, 2018 Trump Throws Ronny Jackson Under the Bus David A. Graham 3:39 PM ET How Gabriel García Márquez Created a World in a Sentence Joe Fassler 12:26 PM ET The Negligent Nomination of Ronny Jackson David A. Graham 11:51 AM ET People Voted for Trump Because They Were Anxious, Not Poor Olga Khazan Apr 23, 2018 Kaveh Waddell Apr 21, 2017 Technology Share Tweet … LinkedIn Email Print Text Size When a robot almost looks human—almost, but not quite—it often comes across as jarringly fake instead of familiar. Robots that are clearly artificial, like WALL-E or R2-D2, don’t have this problem. But androids like this one that imperfectly mimic human mannerisms and facial expressions are weird enough to be haunting. This phenomenon is known as the uncanny valley . It’s a major obstacle for designers who try to make their robots look like people—and it may be just as much of a hurdle for developers who are creating bots that talk like people, but that don’t have a body at all. These bots are all over the place: They’re the digital assistants that talk to us from smartphones and Amazon Echoes, as well as the chatbots that are proliferating on platforms like Skype, Telegram, and Facebook Messenger. Compared to their ancestors, these assistants are quite advanced. Remember Clippy, the animated paperclip that lived in Microsoft Word until 2004? Its prompts were more nuisance than assistance. Amazon’s Alexa, by contrast, can dim the lights, pull the shades, and put on music, all in response to voice commands. But rather than making easy conversationalists, these bots have entered their own version of the uncanny valley. As interacting with them approaches the experience of talking with another human, their robot-ness becomes accentuated. For both androids and chatbots, the uncanny valley problem might have something to do with how we perceive their capabilities. In a study published in Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience in 2012, researchers monitored people’s brain activity as they watched humans and robots move around in a video. They found that when participants watched a human moving fluidly and a very mechanical-looking robot moving jerkily, their brains reacted similarly. But when they watched a robot that looked human but didn’t act like one, their brain activity flared: They experienced what the researchers called a “prediction error.” The same mechanic could be at play when humans interact with virtual assistants. When a bot is clearly a bot, the person interacting with it generally knows how limited its functions are. Take, for example, the digital assistant that answers when you call an airline’s 1-800 number: It asks you a few questions and tries to get you the information you’re looking for. If it can’t, it connects you with a human who can. The bot’s narrowly defined purpose guides the human that’s interacting with it. By contrast, a smooth-talking virtual assistant that tries to mimic human speech, whether out loud or on a screen, can create different assumptions. “The more human-like a system acts, the broader the expectations that people may have for it,” said Justine Cassell, a computer-science professor at Carnegie Mellon University. Cassell told me about a talking robot she and a colleague built in the ’90s that had a 2-D animated head on a computer screen. The head made certain human-like motions as it talked, like shifting its gaze and nodding at appropriate moments in the conversation. Cassell found that when users saw those cues, they unconsciously began talking to the computer more quickly and less clearly, the way they might talk to an actual person. That caused problems. “When people used it that way, they actually made it harder for the system to function effectively,” Cassell said. Siri, of course, doesn’t have a face, and Facebook and Skype bots don’t even have a voice. But modern bots try to trick users into interacting with them as if they’re human in other ways: by bantering and using humor, speaking (or writing) conversationally, and learning to parse free-form questions and answers. “This creates a perception that if you say anything to this bot, it should respond to it,” said Nikhil Mane, an engineer developing conversational AI at Autodesk. That sets the bot up for failure, Mane said. Without a sense of a bot’s limits, a user is liable to overstep the bounds of its ability. When the bot replies to an out-of-scope question in an odd or confusing way, it’s a dissonant reminder of its artificial nature. Mane pointed to Slack, the popular workplace messaging app, for an example of a better approach. The app’s resident helper, Slackbot, prompts users to ask it “simple questions” about how Slack works. “I’m only a bot, but I’ll do my best to answer!” Slackbot says. “If I don’t understand, I’ll search the Help Center.” I threw some basic questions at Slackbot, and it fielded them deftly. But ask it something outside of its purview—“Slackbot, what’s the meaning of life?”—and it responds, “I’m sorry, I don’t understand! Sometimes I have an easier time with a few simple keywords.” Compare that to how Poncho, a weather-app company that created one of the first Facebook chatbots, set expectations about itself when it was first launched. In an interview with Business Insider last year, the company’s CEO said he was aiming to build “the first bot you want to be friends with.” He wanted users to be able to “shoot the breeze” with Poncho on just about any topic, and hired writers to program non-weather answers into the chatbot. But Poncho wasn’t even very good at delivering weather forecasts, its core function. The bot’s gotten better since then, and a little more humble. It answered my weather-related questions with few mistakes, and made some puns when I asked it about its favorite music and movies. Stray too far from the script, though, and the bot hits a wall, with a descriptive message: “So, I’m good at talking about the weather. Other stuff, not so good. If you need help just enter ‘help.’” The modesty was effective. Rather than trying to keep up the charade—one of Poncho’s old answers when it didn’t understand a prompt was “Sorry, I was trying to charge my phone. What were you trying to say?”—it acknowledged its fallibility. The message moved Poncho further away from science fiction—and out of the uncanny valley. Share Tweet Latest Video The Paraplegic Possum, the Cross-Eyed Cat, and the Fish That Can't Swim A couple shares their quirky passion: caring for a menagerie of rescued animals with various disabilities. Emily Buder 1:43 PM ET About the Author Kaveh Waddell is a former staff writer at The Atlantic . Twitter Facebook Email Most Popular Presented by Mark Weaver The Reinvention of America James Fallows Americans don’t realize how fast the country is moving toward becoming a better version of itself. I have seen the future, and it is in the United States. After a several-year immersion in parts of the country that make the news mainly after a natural disaster or a shooting, or for follow-up stories on how the Donald Trump voters of 2016 now feel about Trump, I have a journalistic impulse similar to the one that dominated my years of living in China. That is the desire to tell people how much more is going on, in places they had barely thought about or even heard of, than they might have imagined. To hear more feature stories, see our full list or get the Audm iPhone app. In the case of China, that impulse matched the mood of the times. In the years before and after the world financial crisis of 2008, everyone knew that China was on the way up; reporters like me were just filling in the details. In the case of the modern United States, I am well aware that this message runs so counter to prevailing emotions and ideas as to seem preposterous. Everyone knows how genuinely troubled the United States is at the level of national politics and governance. It is natural to assume that these disorders must reflect a deeper rot across the country. And indeed, you can’t travel extensively through today’s America, as my wife, Deb, and I have been doing in recent years, without being exposed to signs of rot, from opioid addiction to calcifying class barriers. Continue Reading Joshua Roberts / Reuters Trump Throws Ronny Jackson Under the Bus David A. Graham The president appears ready to blithely sacrifice his nominee for veterans affairs secretary as part of a long-running war against the Senate confirmation process. Hours after news of allegations of misconduct emerged against Rear Admiral Ronny Jackson, the White House physician and President Trump’s pick to be the next secretary of veterans affairs, the president had a bizarre commentary to offer. “I told Admiral Jackson just a little while ago, what do you need this for? This is a vicious group of people. … What do you need it for?” Trump said Tuesday, during a joint news conference with French President Emmanuel Macron. “I wouldn’t do it. I wouldn’t do it. What does he need it for? I don’t think personally he should do it. It would be totally his decision.” I don’t think personally he should do it . Could there be a stranger thing to say about the man who you nominated to take the job—whom you delivered over to an “ugly” and “disgusting” confirmation process? Continue Reading Doug McLean How Gabriel García Márquez Created a World in a Sentence Joe Fassler The novelist Mary Morris explains how the opening line of One Hundred Years of Solitude shaped her path as a writer. By Heart is a series in which authors share and discuss their all-time favorite passages in literature. See entries from Colum McCann, George Saunders, Emma Donoghue, Michael Chabon, and more. When I was her student at the Iowa Writers’ Workshop, the novelist Marilynne Robinson told our class it was almost unthinkable for women of her generation to become writers. Society afforded women with an extremely limited range of opportunity: You could be a teacher, nurse, or homemaker, she said, and that was about it. Other paths—especially professionalized, artistic ones—were possible, but extremely hard-won. That was the challenge facing Mary Morris, author of Gateway to the Moon , after she dropped out of grad school in the 1970s. For years, she’d worked in secret, living a kind of creative double life—writing constantly, but never sure she was really a writer . No one ever told her how the verb might earn the noun. Continue Reading Joshua Roberts / Reuters The Negligent Nomination of Ronny Jackson David A. Graham The president’s pick to be secretary of veterans affairs stands accused of misconduct, but with a proper vetting process he would never have been in this position anyway. For the third time in four months, Rear Admiral Ronny Jackson is at the center of a surprising report. The first time came in January, when Jackson, the White House physician, announced that President Trump was in excellent physical and mental health, offering an endorsement so effusive that some were led to question Jackson’s judgment. The second came in March, when President Trump fired Veterans Affairs Secretary David Shulkin and announced that he would nominate Jackson to succeed him . Though Jackson is a flag officer in the Navy, he had never run anything nearly as large and complicated as the federal government’s second-largest bureaucracy. The third came Monday night, with a series of vague reports about “allegations” against Jackson that threatened to slow down or derail his nomination. Senators were tight-lipped about what they might mean, including an elegantly tautological comment from Jon Tester, a Montana Democrat, who said the allegations were troubling “only if true.” Since then, a few new details have emerged. CBS News and The New York Times report the allegations include a hostile work environment in the White House medical office, drinking on the job, and overprescribing medications. Continue Reading Stephen Lam / Reuters People Voted for Trump Because They Were Anxious, Not Poor Olga Khazan A new study finds that Trump voters weren’t losing income or jobs. Instead, they were concerned about their place in the world. For the past 18 months, many political scientists have been seized by one question: Less-educated whites were President Trump’s most enthusiastic supporters. But why, exactly? Was their vote some sort of cri de coeur about a changing economy that had left them behind ? Or was the motivating sentiment something more complex and, frankly, something harder for policy makers to address? After analyzing in-depth survey data from 2012 and 2016, the University of Pennsylvania political scientist Diana C. Mutz argues that it’s the latter. In a new article in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, she added her conclusion to the growing body of evidence that the 2016 election was not about economic hardship. Continue Reading Gregory Reid The Hardest Job in the World John Dickerson What if the problem isn’t the president—it’s the presidency? I. A Broken Office Donald Trump often appears to be a president in rebellion against his office. A president, we have come to expect, hastens to the scene of a natural disaster to comfort the afflicted. After Hurricane Maria devastated Puerto Rico, President Trump arrived tardily and behaved unseriously, tossing rolls of paper towels at storm-battered residents as if he were trying to drain three-point shots. We have come to expect that when the national fabric rends, the president will administer needle and thread, or at least reach for the sewing box of unity. After white supremacists marched through Charlottesville, Virginia, shouting “Jews will not replace us,” President Trump’s instinct was to emphasize that there were good people among the neo-Nazis. Continue Reading Photo 24 / Getty American Nostalgia on a Bun Suzy Swartz The burger, shake, and fries—“enduring icons of American cuisine”— are used to symbolize abundance, accessibility, and dominance while ignoring the dark side of those values. The series Riverdale owes its ratings success to a number of factors, not least of which is its appeal to a relentless and sometimes revisionist nostalgia. The characters are lifted from the classic Archie comics, for one, which are synonymous with the wholesome, mid-century aesthetic they retained from the late ’50s through the 21st century. But the show’s nostalgia for a supposedly simpler time is most evident in the food the characters eat. Betty, Veronica, and the rest of the gang often gather at their local diner, Pop’s Chock’lit Shoppe, where they favor the greasy, calorie-laden stuff of American folklore: burgers, fries, and milkshakes. So integral is the food to the iconography of the show that the cast shared a milkshake on a Jimmy Fallon segment in reference to their characters’ heroic consumption of thick malts. In a Netflix promotional video, the show’s breakout star, Cole Sprouse, stared into a camera doing nothing but sloppily eating a hamburger. Continue Reading Jonathan Ernst / Reuters Trump and Macron See the World Very Differently Uri Friedman That has big implications for everyone else. Emmanuel Macron had something surprising to say about the United States last week, given that the president of the United States would soon be hosting his French counterpart for an elaborate state visit. Hard-edged “national selfishness”—of the kind that plunged the world into war nearly eight decades ago, long before the 40-year-old leader was born—is resurgent and endangering Europe’s “model” of liberal, pluralist democracy and international cooperation, Macron said in a speech before the European Parliament. And the threat to Europe is coming not just from without (“authoritarian powers”) and within (“illiberal” politics in certain European countries), but from its centuries-old ally across the Atlantic. Continue Reading Disney / Marvel Studios How Marvel Is Rewriting Its World Order David Sims Ahead of Avengers: Infinity War , the extended cinematic universe has been sweeping away its status quo—and questioning the very nature of superheroism. In 1986, the famed comic-book creator Frank Miller wrote a seven-part story for Daredevil called “Born Again,” a dark tale of betrayal and redemption that helped usher in the gritty modern age of the medium. Though Miller’s recent turn toward more extreme politics in his work has alienated many fans , his influence in the mid-’80s was crucial to the evolution of mainstream comics. Near the end of “Born Again,” Daredevil, the costumed protector of Hell’s Kitchen, fights a villain named Nuke, whose powers are cataclysmic enough that more epic heroes have to get involved: the Avengers , represented by their best-known members, Captain America, Iron Man, and Thor. The artist David Mazzucchelli draws those three heroes in mythic fashion, with Captain America cradling an injured child in his arms, Thor silhouetted against the storm he has summoned, and Iron Man standing like an immovable sentry, collectively commanding Daredevil to back off. They’re powerful, but entirely inhuman—gods among men who are worlds removed from a street-level hero like Daredevil. With this scene, their grandeur had transmuted from something that was previously soapy and colorful to something remote and frightening. It was a clear sign of a necessary shift in comic-book storytelling, one that no longer easily assumed might made right. Continue Reading Benjamin Rasmussen The Man Who Brought Down Lance Armstrong Matt Hart Floyd Landis, a former teammate of the cyclist’s, just won more than $1 million in a legal case against Armstrong. Here are his thoughts on the suit, cycling, and his onetime rival. A t 5:19 p.m. on Friday , April 30, 2010, Floyd Landis hit send on what would prove the most consequential email of his life. Addressed to the then-CEO of USA Cycling, Steve Johnson, the email bore the subject line “nobody is copied on this one so it’s up to you to demonstrate your true colors….” It went on to detail, year by year, how Landis and other members of the United States Postal Service team had used illegal performance-enhancing drugs and methods to dominate the sport of cycling and claim victories at the sport’s premier event, the Tour de France. The email, later included in Landis’s 2012 affidavit for a United States Anti-Doping Agency ( usada ) investigation, clearly implicated many of his former teammates—most famously, the seven-time Tour winner Lance Armstrong (who declined to comment for this article). Continue Reading The Tax Experiment That Failed Emily Buder In 2012, Kansas passed one of the largest income tax cuts in the state’s history. Today, it serves as a cautionary tale. Watch Video Are Helicopter Parents Ruining a Generation? “We will have among us a young adult population that doesn't know how to ‘hashtag adult.’” Watch Video When Einstein Warned the World Atthar Mirza Seventy years ago, Albert Einstein presaged atomic war. Watch Video More Popular Stories Close Close