URL: https://www.bbc.com/news

BBC News - Breaking news, video and the latest top stories from the U.S. and around the world Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business World of Business Technology of Business NYSE Opening Bell Technology Artificial Intelligence Intelligence Revolution AI v the Mind Tech Now Health Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList Earth Science Natural Wonders Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcast Categories Radio Audio FAQs Video BBC Maestro Discover the World Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters News LIVE Shooting suspect charged with attempted assassination of Trump at Washington dinner Cole Tomas Allen, 31, from California, was also charged with weapon offences allegedly relating to Saturday’s shooting. White House to review Trump's security after shooting at dinner event Questions have been raised about security at the White House Correspondents' Dinner. 3 hrs ago US & Canada How Kenya's Sabastian Sawe broke iconic sub-two-hour barrier at the London Marathon Kenya's Sabastian Sawe on becoming the first person to break the two-hour barrier for the marathon. 9 hrs ago Athletics Lamine Yamal and Chris Martin help Polish influencer raise more than £50m for cancer patients The YouTuber, Piotr Hancke, had celebrity backing for his nine-day, non-stop livestream. 6 hrs ago Newsbeat LIVE King Charles and Queen Camilla meet Trump at White House The royals have officially started the first US state visit by a reigning UK monarch in nearly 20 years. Pakistan accused of attacking Afghan university Air attacks on the province of Kunar have killed at least seven people and injured 75, sources tell the BBC. 4 hrs ago Asia When Attenborough met the gorillas - the story behind his iconic TV moment Two new documentaries explore the the fascinating tale behind the defining image of Attenborough's career. 5 hrs ago Science & Environment Gunmen raid Nigerian orphanage and kidnap children The attack saw 23 children and the facility's proprietress kidnapped by gunmen on Sunday. 6 hrs ago Africa Why Elon Musk and Sam Altman are fighting over OpenAI in $130bn damages lawsuit French coastguard rescues more than 100 migrants crossing Channel Russian fighters confirm withdrawal from northern Mali city after separatist attacks Colombia offers record $1.4m-reward for rebel it blames for deadly bomb attack Michael Jackson biopic smashes box office record Correspondents' dinner shooting What we're learning about suspected Washington press dinner gunman The man arrested at the event attended by President Trump appeared in court on Monday. 'Are we about to die?': Performer describes locking eyes with Trump as they ducked for cover Oz Pearlman - a self-described "mentalist" - was speaking to Trump, First Lady Melania Trump and press secretary Karoline Leavitt as the attack happened. Melania Trump urges ABC to 'take stand' on Jimmy Kimmel after widow joke In a parody aired days before the White House Correspondents' Dinner, Kimmel called Melania an "expectant widow". Video shows suspect charge through checkpoint Surveillance video released by Donald Trump shows the suspect running past metal detectors as security agents draw their guns. More to explore Ukraine's drone commander has Russian oil, troops and morale in his sights In a rare interview, Commander Robert Brovdi shared how his unit accounts for a third of all targets destroyed on the battlefield. 11 hrs ago Europe In pictures: King Charles and Queen Camilla begin US state visit King Charles III and Queen Camilla were greeted by a military band and honour guard as they arrived for their four-day state visit. 6 mins ago UK The Chinese sports brand taking on Nike and Adidas Now one of the biggest sportswear firms, Anta's rise follows a playbook adopted by many Chinese giants. 14 hrs ago Business Canada's Carney has enjoyed a long political honeymoon. Now comes the test Global acclaim and domestic political gains have defined Mark Carney's first year as Canada's PM. He now faces pressure to deliver on his bold promises. 22 hrs ago US & Canada Remembering Raghu Rai: The photographer who showed India to itself With Rai's passing, India has lost a visual historian who was a chronicler of its most defining and often painful moments. 13 hrs ago Asia Most watched 1 Why Elon Musk and Sam Altman are fighting over OpenAI 2 Neighbours of White House correspondents' dinner shooting suspect react 3 What to expect as Trump hosts the King 4 Board of Peace, Zelensky and Musk - What happened before Trump left Davos? 5 Did Trump save eight Iranian women from execution? Also in news At least four killed and dozens injured in Indonesia train crash Officials say a commuter train and a long-distance train collided on the outskirts of Jakarta on Monday. 2 hrs ago Asia At least 42 killed in Chad after water well dispute escalates The dispute was initially between two families before escalating into a cycle of reprisal attacks. 12 hrs ago Africa Archbishop praises Pope's anti-war comments during Vatican visit Dame Sarah Mullally, the first female head of the Church of England, had a private discussion with Pope Leo during the trip. 10 hrs ago Kent Plane crash in South Sudan kills all 15 on board The authorities are investigating but early reports suggest bad weather and poor visibility may be to blame. 5 hrs ago Africa Venice opera house drops incoming music director after nepotism remarks Beatrice Venezi's appointment had been marred in controversy since being announced last September, prompting orchestra members to go on strike. 4 hrs ago Europe Sri Lankan monks arrested after 110kg of cannabis discovered in their luggage Officials say each monk was found with around 5kg of Kush - a particularly potent form of the drug - hidden within "false walls" in their luggage. 9 hrs ago Asia China blocks Meta's $2bn acquisition of AI start-up Manus It comes after months of scrutiny by Chinese regulators over deal struck with Facebook owner. 9 hrs ago Most read 1 Melania Trump urges ABC to 'take stand' on Jimmy Kimmel after widow joke 2 With presidents, cowboys and A-listers - King Charles pictured in US over the years 3 When Attenborough met the gorillas - the story behind his iconic TV moment 4 Claire's closes all 154 stores in UK and Ireland with loss of 1,300 jobs 5 Canada's Carney launches a sovereign wealth fund. What is it? 6 Russian fighters confirm withdrawal from northern Mali city after separatist attacks 7 White House to review Trump's security after shooting at dinner event 8 Gunmen raid Nigerian orphanage and kidnap children 9 Sri Lankan monks arrested after 110kg of cannabis discovered in their luggage 10 Performer describes locking eyes with Trump as they ducked for cover during shooting Sport LIVE Premier League: Man Utd beat Brentford to edge closer to Champions League return Reaction as Manchester United beat Brentford in the Premier League to edge closer to a Champions League return. LIVE World Snooker Championship: Robertson v Wakelin; Trump v Vafaei - live updates Watch live coverage and follow text updates as Neil Robertson faces Chris Wakelin & Judd Trump takes on Hossein Vafaei in the second round at the Crucible in Sheffield. Higgins recovers to beat O'Sullivan in Crucible epic Four-time winner John Higgins produces a sensational recovery from 8-3 and 9-4 down to defeat Ronnie O'Sullivan 13-12 in a final-frame last-16 Crucible epic. 4 hrs ago Snooker Lighter than a bar of soap - the shoes worn to shatter marathon record Sabastian Sawe and Tigst Assefa rewrote the record books in London on Sunday. Was it in part down to the shoes? 8 hrs ago Athletics Joshua signs deal to fight Fury - Hearn Former heavyweight world champion Anthony Joshua has signed to fight Tyson Fury but will first have a warm-up fight against Kristian Prenga in Riyadh on 25 July. 8 hrs ago Boxing Greaves becomes first female PDC title winner Beau Greaves becomes the first woman to win a PDC ranking title by defeating Michael Smith 8-7 in the Players Championship 11 final in Milton Keynes. 2 hrs ago Darts Four ways to tackle football's frustrating 'tactical timeout' Next season, leagues will be allowed to select from a series of trials to try to stop the goalkeeper tactical time-out. BBC Sport looks at the proposals. 7 hrs ago Premier League Sign up to News Briefing News and expert analysis for every schedule. Get morning and evening editions of our flagship newsletter in your inbox. See more