URL: https://www.britannica.com

Encyclopedia Britannica | Britannica Explore Search Britannica Click here to search Search Britannica Click here to search Login History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture ProCon Money Games & Quizzes Videos On This Day One Good Fact Dictionary New Articles History & Society Lifestyles & Social Issues Philosophy & Religion Politics, Law & Government World History Science & Tech Health & Medicine Science Technology Biographies Browse Biographies Animals & Nature Birds, Reptiles & Other Vertebrates Environment Fossils & Geologic Time Insects & Other Invertebrates Mammals Plants Geography & Travel Geography & Travel Arts & Culture Entertainment & Pop Culture Literature Sports & Recreation Visual Arts Image Galleries Podcasts Summaries Top Questions Lists and Stories Britannica Kids You have reached Britannica's public website. Click here for ad-free access to your Britannica School or Library account. Search Britannica Click here to search Ask the Chatbot Games & Quizzes History & Society Science & Tech Biographies Animals & Nature Geography & Travel Arts & Culture ProCon Money Videos Trending Political Violence in the U.S. Michael Jackson Elon Musk Charles III Marathon Who Wrote Shakespeare's Plays? Oprah April 27, 2026 The Magic of the Darkroom Long before photography became instant , images were summoned through patience, chemistry, and light. In the darkroom , memory takes shape by hand, each exposure a deliberate act of preservation. The video below honors photography’s roots not just as process, but as legacy: a way to hold history, family, and community in frame forever. How to Develop Photos in a Darkroom (and Why) Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. The World’s First Photograph and the Story Behind It Gernsheim Collection/Harry Ransom Center, University of Texas at Austin The Historic Horse Motion Study That Revolutionized Film and Photography The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, Rogers Fund, transferred from the Library (1991.1135.9), www. metmuseum.org Read More 12 Key Dates in the History of Photography How Kodak Went from Camera King to Cautionary Tale Beethoven’s Musical Mystery On April 27, 1810, German composer Ludwig van Beethoven wrote what would become one of the most famous songs of all time. But Beethoven himself never performed “Für Elise” in public—and he never even named it. “Für Elise,” meaning “For Elise,” was just a dedication he scribbled on top of his sheet music. Name That Sound Who’s the muse? So who was this famous Elise? Historians are divided. Some think that “Elise” refers to one of Beethoven’s many friends in the opera (like soprano Elisabeth Röckel or child prodigy Elise Barensfeld). Others think “Elise” was actually “Therese”—Therese Malfatti, who declined a marriage proposal from Beethoven that year. We may never know Beethoven’s true muse, but we still have one of the catchiest piano tunes ever written. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. New on Britannica Do Lobsters Mate for Life? Was Phoebe Buffay from Friends right when she said lobsters “fall in love and mate for life”? List of Important Straits Learn about the Strait of Hormuz and other vital waterways. Wheel Bug This assassin bug has a wide range of prey. A Triumphal Arch in D.C.? Pres. Donald Trump has proposed an arch in the nation’s capital. Investing Trading Retirement Household Finance Finance & the Economy Companies What kind of mood is the market in? Check the Cboe Volatility Index (VIX) How to use an inflation calculator (and what it really measures) Centralized vs. decentralized crypto exchanges—which should you choose? Retirement Savings and Strategy for the Homestretch Popular ProCon Debate Topics Astrology Is Astrology Useful? Geothermal Power Is Geothermal Power a Good Form of Energy? Space Colonization Should We Colonize Space? Wind Power Is Wind Power a Good Form of Energy? Featured Games See All Quordle Can you solve four words at once? The Loop - NEW A picture puzzle game Reunion A daily word puzzle Tightrope A daily trivia game Blossom Pick the best words Octordle The party starts at eight Revealed Uncover something interesting The Missing Letter A daily crossword with a twist Pilfer A delightful ruthless word game Twofer Goofer Think you know it, poet? Victordle Play head-to-head! Sudoku Your daily logic challenge Trending Quizzes See All Quizzes Flags of the World Quiz: Undercover Edition Can you identify the country based on just a fraction of a flag? Who Said It? Famous Quotes Quiz Can you name the people associated with these famous quotations? Name That U.S. National Park Quiz Can you tell Yellowstone from Yosemite? Pick Your Battles Quiz Guess which battle was fought during a given war. Guess the U.S. City Can you pin down the names of these places? The Dating Game: Which Came First? Vol. 3 Two monumental choices, one right answer. Name That Greek God Quiz Prepare for your next trip to Mount Olympus by identifying these deities. That Groovy ’70s Quiz Major events and pop culture of the decade that brought you Watergate and mood rings. Spot the Misspelled Word Quiz Think you can detect a spelling error from a mile away? We try our best to decieve you. Guess the Movie: Emoji Quiz It’s the pictures that got small. Featured Videos See All Videos How We Develop New Vaccines Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. How We Develop New Vaccines Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Smallpox and the American Revolution Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. How did the polio vaccine change the world? © American Chemical Society ( A Britannica Publishing Partner ) How Does Hand Sanitizer Kill Germs? Explore Britannica History & Society The White House: A Visual History How Women with Military Backgrounds Are Changing the Face of Politics Science & Tech The Artemis II Space Mission How Much Sleep Do You Need? Biographies Savannah Guthrie Deaths in 2026 Animals & Nature 7 of the World’s Most Poisonous Mushrooms The Perils of an Early Spring Geography & Travel 5 Transit Stations Worth Seeing Strait of Hormuz Arts & Culture A Guide to Art Styles and Movements 10 Superstitions and Traditions in Theater Calculators Mortgage Payment Calculator Estimate your monthly mortgage payments with our free mortgage calculator. Account for interest rates, compound frequency and pay back schedule. Compound Interest Calculator Compounding means getting returns on your previous returns plus your initial investment. Learn how to grow your savings with our compound interest calculator. Percentage Increase Calculator Calculate the increase from one value to another with our free percentage increase calculator. Evaluate population growth, inflation, stock values and more. Retirement Income Calculator Are you on track for retirement? Use our free retirement calculator to help determine how much you'll need to save each year to retire at your desired age. Time Value of Money (TVM) Calculator The time value of money (TVM) principle asserts that the same amount of money is worth more now than in the future. Use our TVM calculator to estimate future value, present value & more.