URL: https://www.thoughtworks.com/insights/books/fluent-python-2nd-edition

Fluent Python 2nd edition | Thoughtworks Enable javascript in your browser for better experience. Need to know to enable it? Go here. Menu Close Worldwide | English Australia English Brazil English | Português Canada English Chile English | Español China English | Chinese Ecuador English | Español Germany English | Deutsch India English Singapore English Spain English | Español Thailand English United Kingdom English United States English Worldwide English Search Close Ask Tai Worldwide | English Australia English Brazil English | Português Canada English Chile English | Español China English | Chinese Ecuador English | Español Germany English | Deutsch India English Singapore English Spain English | Español Thailand English United Kingdom English United States English Worldwide English Search Close Ask Tai Book Order here Fluent Python second edition About this book About this book Listen to the podcast Download a free chapter About the author Books Back Books Back About this book About this book Listen to the podcast Download a free chapter About the author Close Author: Luciano Ramalho Discover how to get more out of Python Python is an easy to learn, powerful programming language. But that ease-of-use means many practicing Python programmers use only a fraction of its powerful features. Author Luciano Ramalho shows you how to get more from Python by outlining its core features — and demonstrating how that helps write clear, concise and effective code. This book provides a hands-on guide for writing modern Python 3 code. It encourages you to forget about bending Python to fit patterns you learned in other languages. Instead, it explores how to leverage Python 3’s best ideas. Order now Podcast Fluent Python revisited This latest episode Luciano discuss about what’s happening in the world of Python — and why it’s popularity continues to endure with Alexey Boas and Ashok Subramanian Listen now The future of Python In this episode, our podcasts team Alexey Boas and Mike Mason chat to Luciano about dunder methods, fast fails and what’s new in the upcoming second edition of Fluent Python. Listen now Get a free chapter Want to get an idea of what this book is all about? We’re delighted to be able to provide a free chapter, so you can try before you buy! In Chapter One of Fluent Python — second edition, Luciano Ramalho explores the Python Data Model, explaining why understanding it is the key to unlocking Python’s full potential as a programming language. Download What readers say This is not the usual dry coding book, but full of useful, tested examples, and just enough humor. My colleagues and I have used this amazing well-written book to take our Python coding to the next level. Maria McKinley Senior Software Engineer Luciano Ramalho Principal consultant Luciano Ramalho is a world-renowned Python expert. The first edition of Fluent Python was a landmark book, demonstrating the true power of this popular programming language. He’s been at Thoughtworks since 2015, where he is a Principal Consultant in the São Paulo office. He has delivered keynotes, talks and tutorials at Python events in the Americas, Europe, and Asia, and also presented at Go and Elixir conferences, focusing on language design topics. Ramalho is a fellow of the Python Software Foundation and cofounder of Garoa Hacker Clube, the first hackerspace in Brazil. Explore the latest volume of the Technology Radar See more