URL: https://www.nber.org/papers/w31161

Generative AI at Work | NBER Skip to main content NBER: National Bureau of Economic Research Search Search Generative AI at Work Erik Brynjolfsson , Danielle Li & Lindsey R. Raymond Share X LinkedIn Facebook Bluesky Threads Email Link Working Paper 31161 DOI 10.3386/w31161 Issue Date April 2023 Revision Date November 2023 New AI tools have the potential to change the way workers perform and learn, but little is known about their impacts on the job. In this paper, we study the staggered introduction of a generative AI-based conversational assistant using data from 5,179 customer support agents. Access to the tool increases productivity, as measured by issues resolved per hour, by 14% on average, including a 34% improvement for novice and low-skilled workers but with minimal impact on experienced and highly skilled workers. We provide suggestive evidence that the AI model disseminates the best practices of more able workers and helps newer workers move down the experience curve. In addition, we find that AI assistance improves customer sentiment, increases employee retention, and may lead to worker learning. Our results suggest that access to generative AI can increase productivity, with large heterogeneity in effects across workers. Acknowledgements and Disclosures We are grateful to Daron Acemoglu, David Autor, Amittai Axelrod, Eleanor Dillon, Zayd Enam, Luis Garicano, Alex Frankel, Sam Manning, Sendhil Mullainathan, Emma Pierson, Scott Stern, Ashesh Rambachan, John Van Reenen, Raffaella Sadun, Kathryn Shaw, Christopher Stanton, Sebastian Thrun, and various seminar participants for helpful comments and suggestions. We thank Max Feng for providing excellent research assistance and the Stanford Digital Economy Lab for funding. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of Stanford University, MIT, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Erik Brynjolfsson Erik Brynjolfsson is the Director of the Stanford Digital Economy Lab and a compensated Committee Member at Luohan Academy. Citation and Citation Data Copy Citation Erik Brynjolfsson, Danielle Li, and Lindsey R. Raymond, "Generative AI at Work," NBER Working Paper 31161 (2023), https://doi.org/10.3386/w31161. Copy to Clipboard Download Citation MARC RIS BibTeΧ Download Citation Data Other Versions April 20, 2023 October 12, 2023 Non-Technical Summaries Measuring the Productivity Impact of Generative AI Author(s): Erik Brynjolfsson Danielle Li Lindsey R. Raymond Customer support agents using an AI tool to guide their conversations saw a nearly 14 percent increase in productivity, with 35... Related Topics Microeconomics Economics of Information Labor Economics Labor Supply and Demand Other Accounting, Marketing, and Personnel Development and Growth Innovation and R&D Programs Corporate Finance Industrial Organization Law and Economics Labor Studies Productivity, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship Working Groups Entrepreneurship Innovation Policy Organizational Economics Personnel Economics Conferences SI 2023 Personnel Economics Mentioned in the News Successful AI adoption needs workers in the loop - Financial Times October 22, 2025 Source: Financial Times Read the research here . Or a non-technical summary here . Why AI Isn't Delivering ROI-And Three Fixes That Actually Work - Forbes September 8, 2025 Source: Forbes Read the research here . Or a non-technical summary here . View All More from the NBER In addition to working papers , the NBER disseminates affiliates’ latest findings through a range of free periodicals — the NBER Reporter , the NBER Digest , the Bulletin on Health , and the Bulletin on Entrepreneurship — as well as online conference reports , video lectures , and interviews . 2025, 17th Annual Feldstein Lecture, N. Gregory Mankiw," The Fiscal Future" Feldstein Lecture Presenter: N. Gregory Mankiw N. Gregory Mankiw, Robert M. Beren Professor of Economics at Harvard University, presented the 2025 Martin Feldstein... 2025, Methods Lecture, Raj Chetty and Kosuke Imai, "Uncovering Causal Mechanisms: Mediation Analysis and Surrogate Indices" Methods Lectures Presenters: Raj Chetty & Kosuke Imai SlidesBackground materials on mediationImai, Kosuke, Dustin Tingley, and Teppei Yamamoto. (2013). “Experimental Designs... 2025, International Trade and Macroeconomics, "Panel on The Future of the Global Economy" Panel Discussion Presenters: Oleg Itskhoki , Paul R. Krugman & Linda Tesar Supported by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation grant #G-2023-19633, the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation grant #20251294...