URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/electricity-2024

Electricity 2024 – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search Sign In Flyout close You are connecting via IP recognition from . If you wish to proceed, click on Connect . If you prefer to log into your personal account, please sign in below. Connect Connect OR Email * Error Password * Forgot password? Eye Error Sign in Sign in Create an account Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service. Join for free Join for free cross Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast to 2026 Download PDF Electricity 2026 available View report About this report Electricity is central to the functioning of modern societies and economies – and its importance is only growing as technologies that run on electricity, such as electric vehicles and heat pumps, become increasingly popular. Power generation is currently the largest source of carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) emissions in the world, but it is also the sector leading the transition to net zero emissions through the rapid expansion of renewable energy sources such as solar and wind power. Ensuring consumers have secure and affordable access to electricity while also reducing global carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) emissions is one of the core challenges of the energy transition. Given these trends, the International Energy Agency’s Electricity 2024 is essential reading. It offers a deep and comprehensive analysis of recent policies and market developments, and provides forecasts through 2026 for electricity demand, supply and CO 2 emissions. The IEA’s electricity sector report, which has been published regularly since 2020, provides insight into the evolving generation mix. In addition, this year’s report features in-depth analysis on the drivers of recent declines in electricity demand in Europe; the data centre sector’s impact on electricity consumption; and recent developments in the global nuclear power sector. Published 24 January 2024 Licence CC BY 4.0 Press release Share Cite Online table of contents 1.0 Executive summary read Read online Previous editions Electricity Market Report – Update 2023 arrow-right Electricity Market Report 2023 arrow-right Electricity Market Report - July 2022 arrow-right Electricity Market Report - January 2022 arrow-right Electricity Market Report - July 2021 arrow-right Electricity Market Report - December 2020 arrow-right Cite report Close dialog IEA (2024), Electricity 2024 , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/electricity-2024, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on Twitter Twitter Share on Facebook Facebook Share on LinkedIn LinkedIn Share on Bluesky Bluesky Share on Email Email Share on Print Print Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.