URL: https://www.theregister.com/2017/01/05/googles_grumpy_makes_python_go/

Google's Grumpy code makes Python Go • The Register My Account The Register Home Page Search Search The Register Navigation Devops 55 This article is more than 1 year old Google's Grumpy code makes Python Go 55 With a transcompiling tool, YouTube aims to overcome Python's limitations Thomas Claburn Thu 5 Jan 2017 // 00:20 UTC Google on Wednesday introduced an open-source project called Grumpy to translate Python code into Go programs. The company's front-end server for YouTube and its YouTube API are mainly written in Python, and run on CPython 2.7, as opposed to other implementations (Jython, PyPy, or IronPython). The issue for Google is performance. Python in its various forms doesn't excel at concurrency – running multiple, independent threads at the same time – explains YouTube engineer Dylan Trotter in a blog post . Grumpy is a source code transcompiler and runtime. It compiles Python source code into Go source code that gets compiled into native code rather than bytecode that requires a VM. The compiled Go code makes calls to the Grumpy runtime, which is a Go library that functions similarly to the Python C API. Trotter characterizes Grumpy as experimental, but that doesn't mean support for Python 3 is forthcoming as the project matures. In response to a request for Python 3 support, Trotter on GitHub said, "We have a large Python 2.7 codebase so that's what we've been focused on. I definitely would like to support Python 3. It's just a bunch of work." He suggested those interested in Python 3 support should fork the project. One possible rationale for creating Grumpy may be the planned end-of-life date for Python 2.7 in 2020 . Rather than trying to update all its Python code from version 2.7 to 3 – which has been slow to catch on – Google appears to be planning to convert at least some of its Python code to Go over the next few years. Google didn't immediately respond to a request for comment. In a post to Hacker News, Trotter offered his thoughts on the matter. "The idea is to continue to write code in Python," he said. "The transcompiled code is not suitable for working with directly. That said, there is the possibility of rewriting bits and pieces in Go (eg, performance-critical stuff) and then call into it from Python. Sort of a hybrid approach." Three years hence and beyond, that hybrid approach can be expected to include a lot more Go code, provided Google's developers become as proficient with Go as they are with Python. Go, as Trotter suggests, has performance advantages over Python (though benchmarks can vary significantly, depending upon optimizations and alternative implementations). It also has brand advantages: Go was developed at Google and the company's willingness to eat its own dogfood, so to speak, could convince other organizations that Go is the way to go. Google doesn't benefit directly from Go adoption, but broader usage will deepen the talent pool of Go developers, who could in time end up working at Google or improving Go libraries that Google uses. There's also the opportunity cost imposed on competitors – the more time developers spend with Go, the less they have to spend with languages backed by Apple, Microsoft, Mozilla, Oracle, or others. ® Get our Tech Resources Share More about Development Programming Python More like these × More about Development Programming Python Narrower topics Accessibility Analytics Computer Science Devops llvm Low code Broader topics Programming Language More about Share 55 COMMENTS More about Development Programming Python More like these × More about Development Programming Python Narrower topics Accessibility Analytics Computer Science Devops llvm Low code Broader topics Programming Language TIP US OFF Send us news Other stories you might like Python releases version 3.14 – with cautious free-threaded support JIT compiler included but experimental and can slow performance Devops 8 Oct 2025 | 18 Salesforce pickin' up good vibrations Agentforce Vibes is a new AI-assisted IDE for building Salesforce apps and agents AI + ML 2 Oct 2025 | 5 OpenAI tells developers ChatGPT is ready to be their gatekeeper Integrate your apps via their Apps SDK and maybe they'll send you some business AI + ML 6 Oct 2025 | 6 Resilient, continuously active data – with no compromise When the gap between data generation and action is a strategic liability, it's time for a fix Sponsored Feature Curl project, swamped with AI slop, finds not all AI is bad Artificial intelligence works when humans use it wisely AI + ML 2 Oct 2025 | 9 Google fuses SQL, Python, and Spark in Colab Enterprise push Move comes as Snowflake and Databricks chase the same all-in-one analytics dream Databases 26 Sep 2025 | 4 New string of phishing attacks targets Python developers If you recently got an email asking you to verify your credentials to a PyPI site, better change that password Cyber-crime 24 Sep 2025 | 3 Walmart's bet on AI depends on getting employees to use it The technology isn't the hard part, says enterprise business services SVP, it's managing people AI + ML 11 Sep 2025 | 37 Shell to pay: Crims invade your PC with CastleRAT malware, now in C and Python Pro tip, don't install PowerShell commands without approval Cyber-crime 5 Sep 2025 | 4 Classic Psion fan releases proof-of-concept language server for OPL Vintage computing boffinry to please palmtop enthusiasts Applications 27 Aug 2025 | 23 Python survey shows growth even as Foundation funding falters But 3.13 adoption lags as most devs stick with earlier releases Devops 19 Aug 2025 | 18 Boffins build automated Android bug hunting system AI agent system said to have found more than 100 zero-day flaws in production apps Security 4 Sep 2025 | 4