URL: https://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/ai-speeds-up-drug-design-for-parkinsons-ten-fold

AI speeds up drug design for Parkinson’s ten-fold | University of Cambridge Study at Cambridge About the University Research at Cambridge For Cambridge students For staff For alumni For our researchers Business and enterprise Colleges and Departments Give to Cambridge Libraries Museums and collections Search Search Study at Cambridge Undergraduate Courses Apply Events and open days Fees and finance Postgraduate Postgraduate courses Apply Fees and funding Postgraduate events International students Professional and continuing education Executive and professional education Courses in education About the University How the University and Colleges work Term dates History Map Visiting the University News Annual reports A global university Equality and diversity Events Public engagement Jobs Give to Cambridge Research at Cambridge For Cambridge students For staff For alumni For our researchers Business and enterprise Colleges and Departments Give to Cambridge Libraries Museums and collections Home Research News AI speeds up drug design for Parkinson’s ten-fold Research Research home News Our people About research About research overview Animal research Animal research overview Overseeing animal research Overseeing animal research overview The Animal Welfare and Ethical Review Body Animal welfare and ethics What types of animal do we use? What types of animal do we use? overview Chickens Guinea pigs Equine species Mice Naked mole-rats Non-human primates (marmosets) Other birds Rats Sheep Xenopus Zebrafish Non-technical summaries Animal Welfare Policy Animal Welfare Policy overview Concordat on Openness on Animal Research Alternatives to animal use FAQs Further information Research culture Research culture overview Narrative CVs project Open research Strategic Initiatives & Networks Interdisciplinary Research Centres Energy sector partnerships Nobel Prize Horizons magazine Research integrity Research integrity overview Statement Reports Advisory panel Advisory panel overview Procedures Resources Resources overview Good Research Practice guidance Good Research Practice guidance overview Good Research Practice checklist Guidelines on authorship Citing blogs as reference sources Research misconduct Business and enterprise Our impact AI speeds up drug design for Parkinson’s ten-fold Researchers have used artificial intelligence techniques to massively accelerate the search for Parkinson’s disease treatments. Machine learning is having a real impact on drug discovery – it’s speeding up the whole process of identifying the most promising candidates Michele Vendruscolo The researchers, from the University of Cambridge, designed and used an AI-based strategy to identify compounds that block the clumping, or aggregation, of alpha-synuclein, the protein that characterises Parkinson’s. The team used machine learning techniques to quickly screen a chemical library containing millions of entries, and identified five highly potent compounds for further investigation. Parkinson’s affects more than six million people worldwide, with that number projected to triple by 2040. No disease-modifying treatments for the condition are currently available. The process of screening large chemical libraries for drug candidates – which needs to happen well before potential treatments can be tested on patients – is enormously time-consuming and expensive, and often unsuccessful. Using machine learning, the researchers were able to speed up the initial screening process ten-fold, and reduce the cost by a thousand-fold, which could mean that potential treatments for Parkinson’s reach patients much faster. The results are reported in the journal Nature Chemical Biology . Parkinson’s is the fastest-growing neurological condition worldwide. In the UK, one in 37 people alive today will be diagnosed with Parkinson’s in their lifetime. In addition to motor symptoms, Parkinson’s can also affect the gastrointestinal system, nervous system, sleeping patterns, mood and cognition, and can contribute to a reduced quality of life and significant disability. Proteins are responsible for important cell processes, but when people have Parkinson’s, these proteins go rogue and cause the death of nerve cells. When proteins misfold, they can form abnormal clusters called Lewy bodies, which build up within brain cells stopping them from functioning properly. “One route to search for potential treatments for Parkinson’s requires the identification of small molecules that can inhibit the aggregation of alpha-synuclein, which is a protein closely associated with the disease,” said Professor Michele Vendruscolo from the Yusuf Hamied Department of Chemistry, who led the research. “But this is an extremely time-consuming process – just identifying a lead candidate for further testing can take months or even years.” While there are currently clinical trials for Parkinson’s currently underway, no disease-modifying drug has been approved, reflecting the inability to directly target the molecular species that cause the disease. This has been a major obstacle in Parkinson’s research, because of the lack of methods to identify the correct molecular targets and engage with them. This technological gap has severely hampered the development of effective treatments. The Cambridge team developed a machine learning method in which chemical libraries containing millions of compounds are screened to identify small molecules that bind to the amyloid aggregates and block their proliferation. A small number of top-ranking compounds were then tested experimentally to select the most potent inhibitors of aggregation. The information gained from these experimental assays was fed back into the machine learning model in an iterative manner, so that after a few iterations, highly potent compounds were identified. “Instead of screening experimentally, we screen computationally,” said Vendruscolo, who is co-Director of the Centre for Misfolding Diseases . “By using the knowledge we gained from the initial screening with our machine learning model, we were able to train the model to identify the specific regions on these small molecules responsible for binding, then we can re-screen and find more potent molecules.” Using this method, the Cambridge team developed compounds to target pockets on the surfaces of the aggregates, which are responsible for the exponential proliferation of the aggregates themselves. These compounds are hundreds of times more potent, and far cheaper to develop, than previously reported ones. “Machine learning is having a real impact on drug discovery – it’s speeding up the whole process of identifying the most promising candidates,” said Vendruscolo. “For us, this means we can start work on multiple drug discovery programmes – instead of just one. So much is possible due to the massive reduction in both time and cost – it’s an exciting time.” The research was conducted in the Chemistry of Health Laboratory in Cambridge, which was established with the support of the UK Research Partnership Investment Fund (UKRPIF) to promote the translation of academic research into clinical programmes. Reference: Robert I Horne et al. ‘ Discovery of Potent Inhibitors of α-Synuclein Aggregation Using Structure-Based Iterative Learning .’ Nature Chemical Biology (2024). DOI: 10.1038/s41589-024-01580-x The text in this work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License . Images, including our videos, are Copyright ©University of Cambridge and licensors/contributors as identified. All rights reserved. We make our image and video content available in a number of ways – on our main website under its Terms and conditions , and on a range of channels including social media that permit your use and sharing of our content under their respective Terms. Read this next Damage to brain’s white matter may play key role in neurodegenerative disease, and could be target for future treatments European Commission greenlights €211 million funding for Cambridge graphene photonics spinout New computer chip material inspired by the human brain could slash AI energy use Speaker spotlight: Hanna Foerster Published 17 Apr 2024 Share this page Share on Bluesky Share by email Share on Facebook Share on LinkedIn Share on Reddit Share on WhatsApp Share on X Image Michele Vendruscolo Credit: Nathan Pitt Search research Keyword search Go Sign up to receive our weekly research email Our selection of the week's biggest Cambridge research news sent directly to your inbox. Enter your email address, confirm you're happy to receive our emails and then select 'Subscribe'. Email I wish to receive a weekly Cambridge research news summary by email. The University of Cambridge will use your email address to send you our weekly research news email. We are committed to protecting your personal information and being transparent about what information we hold. Please read our email privacy notice for details. Subjects Parkinson's disease Artificial intelligence machine learning drug discovery Neuroscience neurodegeneration People Michele Vendruscolo Places Department of Chemistry School of the Physical Sciences Centre for Misfolding Diseases Connect with us Facebook Instagram LinkedIn X YouTube © 2026 University of Cambridge Contact the University Accessibility statement Freedom of information Privacy policy and cookies Statement on Modern Slavery Terms and conditions University A-Z Study at Cambridge Undergraduate Postgraduate Professional and continuing education Executive and professional education About the University How the University and Colleges work Give to Cambridge Jobs Maps Visiting the University Cambridge University Press & Assessment Research at Cambridge Research news About research at Cambridge Public engagement