URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/countries-agree-to-safe-and-responsible-development-of-frontier-ai-in-landmark-bletchley-declaration

Countries agree to safe and responsible development of frontier AI in landmark Bletchley Declaration - GOV.UK Cookies on GOV.UK We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies View cookies Hide cookie message Skip to main content Press release Countries agree to safe and responsible development of frontier AI in landmark Bletchley Declaration Leading AI nations have reached a world-first agreement at Bletchley Park establishing a shared understanding of the opportunities and risks posed by frontier AI. From: Prime Minister's Office, 10 Downing Street , Department for Science, Innovation and Technology , Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office , The Rt Hon Rishi Sunak MP , The Rt Hon Michelle Donelan and The Rt Hon James Cleverly MP Published 1 November 2023 This was published under the 2022 to 2024 Sunak Conservative government For the first time, 28 countries convened by the UK and including the US, EU and China agree opportunities, risks and need for international action on frontier AI – systems where we face the most urgent and dangerous risks driving forward key summit objectives on understanding of the risks and establishing further global collaboration, crucial talks are underway at Bletchley Park with the Technology Secretary opening the 2-day Summit consensus on need for sustained international co-operation sees next summit hosts confirmed Leading AI nations, convened for the first time by the UK and including the United States and China, along with the European Union, have today (Wednesday 1 November 2023) reached a world-first agreement at Bletchley Park establishing a shared understanding of the opportunities and risks posed by frontier AI and the need for governments to work together to meet the most significant challenges. The Bletchley Declaration on AI safety sees 28 countries from across the globe including Africa, the Middle East, and Asia, as well as the EU, agreeing to the urgent need to understand and collectively manage potential risks through a new joint global effort to ensure AI is developed and deployed in a safe, responsible way for the benefit of the global community. Countries endorsing the Declaration include Brazil, France, India, Ireland, Japan, Kenya, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Nigeria and the United Arab Emirates. The Declaration fulfils key summit objectives in establishing shared agreement and responsibility on the risks, opportunities and a forward process for international collaboration on frontier AI safety and research, particularly through greater scientific collaboration. Talks today, with leading frontier AI companies and experts from academia and civil society, will see further discussions on understanding frontier AI risks and improving frontier AI safety. Countries agreed substantial risks may arise from potential intentional misuse or unintended issues of control of frontier AI , with particular concern caused by cybersecurity, biotechnology and disinformation risks. The Declaration sets out agreement that there is “potential for serious, even catastrophic, harm, either deliberate or unintentional, stemming from the most significant capabilities of these AI models.” Countries also noted the risks beyond frontier AI , including bias and privacy. Recognising the need to deepen the understanding of risks and capabilities that are not fully understood, attendees have also agreed to work together to support a network of scientific research on Frontier AI safety. This builds on the UK Prime Minister’s announcement last week for the UK to establish the world’s first AI Safety Institute and complementing existing international efforts including at the G7, OECD , Council of Europe, United Nations and the Global Partnership on AI . This will ensure the best available scientific research can be used to create an evidence base for managing the risks whilst unlocking the benefits of the technology, including through the UK’s AI Safety Institute which will look at the range of risks posed by AI . The Declaration details that the risks are “best addressed through international cooperation”. As part of agreeing a forward process for international collaboration on frontier AI safety, The Republic of Korea has agreed to co-host a mini virtual summit on AI in the next 6 months. France will then host the next in-person Summit in a year from now. Further details on these events will be confirmed in due course. This ensures an enduring legacy from the Summit and continued international action to tackle AI risks, including informing national and international risk-based policies across these countries. The Declaration, building upon last week’s announcement of the UK’s emerging processes for AI safety, also acknowledges that those developing these unusually powerful and potentially dangerous frontier AI capabilities, have a particular responsibility for ensuring the safety of these systems, including by implementing systems to test them and other appropriate measures. Prime Minister Rishi Sunak said: This is a landmark achievement that sees the world’s greatest AI powers agree on the urgency behind understanding the risks of AI – helping ensure the long-term future of our children and grandchildren. Under the UK’s leadership, more than 25 countries at the AI Safety Summit have stated a shared responsibility to address AI risks and take forward vital international collaboration on frontier AI safety and research. The UK is once again leading the world at the forefront of this new technological frontier by kickstarting this conversation, which will see us work together to make AI safe and realise all its benefits for generations to come. Technology Secretary Michelle Donelan, said: Today’s agreement signed by attendees from across the globe, offers an important first step as we begin 2 days of vitally important discussions here at Bletchley Park. We have always said that no single country can face down the challenges and risks posed by AI alone, and today’s landmark Declaration marks the start of a new global effort to build public trust by ensuring the technology’s safe development. Bletchley Park marks the start of a long road ahead, and the Summit will kickstart an enduring process to ensure every nation and every citizen can realise the boundless benefits of AI . Foreign Secretary, James Cleverly, said: AI knows no borders, and its impact on the world will only deepen. The UK is proud to have kickstarted the global discussion at Bletchley Park on how we ensure the transformational power of AI is used as a force for good by and for all of us. A spokesperson for the French Presidency said: The French authorities welcome the international and cooperative work cycle launched by the AI Safety Summit to analyse, understand and respond to the risks that certain Frontier AI models could cause. France is ready to participate in this long-term collective effort and will be happy to host the next in person Summit. A spokesperson for the Republic of Korea Government said: Minister Lee is delighted that Korea will be the co-hosts of the mini virtual summit. Korea is a world leader in technologies like AI and recognises the importance of multilateral cooperation to ensure AI technologies are designed, used and governed in safe ways. To mark the opening of the Summit, His Majesty The King delivered a virtual address, via video to the AI Safety Summit this morning as proceedings got underway. His Majesty pointed to AI being one of the ‘greatest technological leaps in the history of human endeavour’ and hailed the technology’s enormous potential to transform the lives of citizens across the world through better treatments for conditions like cancer and heart disease. The King also spoke of the ‘clear imperative to ensure that this rapidly evolving technology remains safe and secure’ and the need for ‘international coordination and collaboration’. The King’s address signed-off with thanks for the vital role attendees will play over the next two days, laying the foundations for a ‘lasting consensus’ on AI safety to cement its place as a force for good. Further information The Bletchley Declaration by Countries Attending the AI Safety Summit, 1-2 November 2023 Further information on the AI Safety Summit 2023 His Majesty The King’s address to the opening day of the summit The full list of countries represented is below: Australia Brazil Canada Chile China European Union France Germany India Indonesia Ireland Israel Italy Japan Kenya Kingdom of Saudi Arabia Netherlands Nigeria The Philippines Republic of Korea Rwanda Singapore Spain Switzerland Türkiye Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United States of America Share this page The following links open in a new tab Share on Facebook (opens in new tab) Share on Twitter (opens in new tab) Updates to this page Published 1 November 2023 Is this page useful? Maybe Yes this page is useful No this page is not useful Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab and requires JavaScript ) . Cancel