URL: https://www.python.org/download/other/

Download Python for other platforms | Python.org Notice: This page displays a fallback because interactive scripts did not run. Possible causes include disabled JavaScript or failure to load scripts or stylesheets. Donate ≡ Menu Search This Site GO A A Smaller Larger Reset Socialize LinkedIn Mastodon Chat on IRC Twitter Python >>> Downloads >>> Other Platforms Download Python for other platforms Python has been ported to a number of specialized and/or older platforms, listed below in alphabetical order. Note that these ports often lag well behind the latest Python release. Python for AIX AIX binary packages for Python are available from IBM AIX Toolbox in RPM format. They can be installed using dnf package manager. Visit the Get Started page for more details. Python for HP-UX You can purchase ActivePython (commercial and community versions, including scientific computing modules, not open source) Python for IBM i (formerly AS/400, iSeries) Both Python 2 and Python 3 are available from IBM in RPM form. They can be installed with the yum package manager or with the IBM i Access Client Solutions product. To get started with RPM-based open source packages for IBM i, visit http://ibm.biz/ibmi-rpms . These RPM packages require a version of IBM i in active (not extended) support. Python for iOS and iPadOS Briefcase (from the BeeWare project) and Buildozer (from the Kivy project) are two tools that can be used to deploy Python code as an iOS app. Python-Apple-support is a project that provides pre-compiled Python frameworks that can be embedded into an Xcode project. PythonKit can be used to provide Swift integration with Python. Pythonista is a complete development environment for writing Python scripts including third-party libraries and system integration on your iPad or iPhone. Pyto also provides a complete development environment for running Python 3 including many third-party libraries and system integration on an iPad or iPhone. Alternate Python packages for Linux You can purchase ActivePython (commercial and community versions, including scientific computing modules, not open source) Python for RISC OS Python is available for RISC OS, and can be obtained using the PackMan package manager. Python for Solaris You can purchase ActivePython (commercial and community versions, including scientific computing modules, not open source), or build from source if you have a C compiler. UNIX Packages has a variety of Python versions for a variety of Solaris versions. These use the standard Sun pkgadd. Python for UEFI Environment Standard CPython version 3.6.8 port for the Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI) shell environment is available through the Tianocore open source project. This provides the standard Python scripting capabilities on UEFI environment, helping the UEFI based firmware and platform developer community to use it for platform, firmware validation, debug and the like. Python for UEFI source code and build instructions are available here . Currently build support is enabled using VS2019 and GCC5 tool chains for x86 and x64 bit platforms. Python for z/OS Rocket Software provides a port of Python for z/OS . Python for z/OS is available from IBM for no license charge. It is available in PAX format from Early Programs Web Tool or SMP/E format from Shopz . Optional no-cost Subscription and Support (S&S) is available in the Shopz ordering process. Please visit the IBM Open Enterprise SDK for Python product page for more information. The PSF The Python Software Foundation is the organization behind Python. Become a member of the PSF and help advance the software and our mission.