URL: https://www.foxnews.com/politics/regulate-ai-gop-much-more-skeptical-than-dems-that-the-government-can-do-it-right-poll

Regulate AI? GOP much more skeptical than Dems that government can do it right: poll | Fox News Fox News Expand / Collapse search Log In Watch TV Menu Games Expand/Collapse Menu Scattergories Daily 5 Across the Letter Word Game DownWords Sudoku Swap Words Word Search Icon Match Daily Crossword Puzzle Mini Crossword Puzzle Deals Expand/Collapse Menu Trending Deals Gift Guides Home Deals Kitchen Deals Tech and Electronic Deals Health and Fitness Deals Beauty and Fashion Deals FOX Business Expand/Collapse Menu Economy Personal Finance Markets Watchlist Lifestyle Real Estate Tech Science & Tech Expand/Collapse Menu Air & Space Security Innovation Video Games Military Tech Planet Earth Wild Nature Watch Live Expand/Collapse Menu FOX News Shows Programming Schedule On Air Personalities Full Episodes Show Clips News Clips Apps & Products Expand/Collapse Menu FOX News Go FOX Weather FOX Nation FOX Noticias FOX News Shop FOX News Radio FOX News Newsletters FOX News Podcasts FOX One Games Expand/Collapse Menu Scattergories Daily 5 Across the Letter Word Game DownWords Sudoku Swap Words Word Search Icon Match Daily Crossword Puzzle Mini Crossword Puzzle Deals Expand/Collapse Menu Trending Deals Gift Guides Home Deals Kitchen Deals Tech and Electronic Deals Health and Fitness Deals Beauty and Fashion Deals FOX Business Expand/Collapse Menu Economy Personal Finance Markets Watchlist Lifestyle Real Estate Tech Science & Tech Expand/Collapse Menu Air & Space Security Innovation Video Games Military Tech Planet Earth Wild Nature Watch Live Expand/Collapse Menu FOX News Shows Programming Schedule On Air Personalities Full Episodes Show Clips News Clips Apps & Products Expand/Collapse Menu FOX News Go FOX Weather FOX Nation FOX Noticias FOX News Shop FOX News Radio FOX News Newsletters FOX News Podcasts FOX One Facebook Twitter Instagram RSS Newsletters Fox News Terms of Use Privacy Policy Your Privacy Choices Closed Caption Policy Help Contact Us Accessibility Statement News Sitemap Video Sitemap This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. ©2026 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. Quotes displayed in real-time or delayed by at least 15 minutes. Market data provided by Factset . Powered and implemented by FactSet Digital Solutions . Legal Statement . Mutual Fund and ETF data provided by LSEG . Recommended Videos Recommended Articles Left Arrow Fox News Campus Radicals Newsletter: UCLA mob mess, veiled threats of violence and a major win over DEI Florida Dem filed for re-election days before resignation as House Ethics Committee ramped up pressure Mamdani in the hot seat after first veto derails bipartisan effort to combat antisemitism: 'Disappointed' Transgender lawmaker 'doesn't know what a woman is,' White House says after dig at Trump firings Hakeem Jeffries left scrambling after child reporter asks why voters view Democrats so negatively WATCH: Trump reveals flashy new color for National Mall's reflecting pool makeover Neo-Nazi, Klan 'Cyclops' and ‘Sadistic’ biker: Here's who SPLC allegedly paid in its informant network Mike Minogue heads to Mass GOP convention ready to take on Maura Healey: 'She's bankrupting our state' House Republican would '100%' leave the GOP if red state changed primary rules How mutiny at Southern Poverty Law Center triggered leadership collapse Trump DOJ jumps into Musk xAI court battle as diversity fight heats up Ilhan Omar vinegar attacker changes plea after chaotic onstage rush Texas Dem James Talarico rips 'un-Christian' court decision on what's allowed in classrooms Pentagon cracks open Biden’s botched Afghan withdrawal as sweeping report readies all the receipts SPLC indictment builds momentum for Bessent's Treasury to probe partisan nonprofits Justice Department announces it's readopting the firing squad as a means of execution Loudoun County transgender substitute charged with making school threats Reporter's Notebook: Spring cleaning resignations rock House as ethics storm builds SEE IT: 2-year-old steals show at White House as Trump spotlights 'miracle cure' for deaf boy Blue state residents 'fleeing in droves' after ‘insane’ progressive takeover, says top state attorney Right Arrow Left Arrow ‘The View’ co-hosts say they wouldn’t attend WHCD ICE reportedly probing fatal Ohio truck crash Trace Gallagher: Does the legacy media not do the math? ‘Gutfeld!’ runs through the week’s leftover jokes There is a ‘pattern of constitutional abuse’ by Democrats, Gregg Jarrett says Vivek Ramaswamy: If Europe doesn't shape up, this will happen This is so classically leftist, comedian says President Trump will see this through, vice admiral says ‘3 years ago, Baba, remember?’: Chris Wallace reunites with a panda friend Lt Gen Keith Kellogg: Iran is very weak, we need to keep the pressure on Juan Williams: President Trump views the pressure as being on Iran Laura: Democrats don't have time for this type of hard work 'Friday Follies': Prince Harry tries to 'dictate' American politics Jesse Watters: The regime is getting desperate Laura Ingraham: Everything Dems did made America weaker and more vulnerable Charges against US soldier accused of betting on Maduro capture not ‘true justice’: GOP lawmaker Stephen Miller calls appeals court ruling Trump’s asylum ban illegal an ‘abomination’ The Left violates nearly every principle it puts forward: Horace Cooper Progressive ‘fearmongering’ campaign torched ahead of World Cup Mentalist Oz Pearlman amazes Bret Baier ahead of White House Correspondents' Dinner, plus political 'Notable Quotables' Right Arrow Artificial Intelligence Regulate AI? GOP much more skeptical than Dems that government can do it right: poll Trump, Biden voters showed widest gap on question of AI regulation By Peter Kasperowicz Fox News Published May 2, 2023 2:00am EDT | Updated May 2, 2023 6:18am EDT Facebook Twitter Threads Flipboard Comments Print Email Add Fox News on Google close Video AI changing political landscape after RNC turns to tech for latest ad Tom Newhouse, vice president of Convergence Media, discusses the potential impact of artificial intelligence on elections after an RNC AI ad garnered attention. NEW You can now listen to Fox News articles! Republicans are less convinced than Democrats that the federal government needs to impose regulations on artificial intelligence systems and are even more skeptical on whether the government is up to the task, according to a new Fox News poll. The poll of registered voters shows a noticeable gap between the two parties on the question of whether and how to regulate AI, a sign that the increasingly important issue could get hung up in politics as it advances in Washington. When asked how important it is for the federal government to regulate AI , 82% of Democrats said "very" or "somewhat," compared to 71% of Republicans. That was one of the bigger splits in a poll that found 76% of respondents saw some importance to federal regulation. FOX NEWS POLL: MORE SEE BAD THAN GOOD IN AI Former President Donald Trump, left, and current President Joe Biden (James Devaney / GC Images / File | Alex Wong / Getty Images / File) A similar split was seen when the group was split between Biden and Trump supporters – 82% of Biden voters favored federal regulation compared to 70% of Trump voters. The split between parties got even wider when respondents were asked how confident they are that the government could "properly regulate" AI. The poll said 50% of Democrats answered "a great deal" or "some" while 31% of Republicans gave one of those answers. A full two-thirds of GOP respondents said they had "not much" or "none at all" when asked about their confidence level. That split grew wider when comparing Biden to Trump voters. Just 28% of Trump voters said they had some measure of confidence in the government on AI, compared to 51% of Biden voters. CHINA FUMES AS BIDEN PLOTS TO STARVE IT OF AI INVESTMENT: ‘SCI-TECH BULLYING’ The NRSC is launching a new ad campaign that targets vulnerable Senate Democrats up for reelection in 2024 over their past support for the American Rescue Plan. (Fox News) GOP skepticism weighed heavily on the poll. Just 39% of the entire group of respondents said they had some confidence in the government, compared to the 59% who said they were not confident. Overall, voters are "skeptical elected leaders are up to the task of placing appropriate limits on this new tech, which probably says something about opinion on the tech and opinion on our leaders," said Daron Shaw, a Republican who conducts the Fox News poll with Democrat Chris Anderson. Whether the government is ready or not, federal policymakers are increasingly examining how to regulate AI systems that many argue will soon bring radical changes to all aspects of life. The Biden administration has set out a blueprint aimed at encouraging a fair, safe AI that doesn’t lead to discriminatory economic results for Americans. AI PAUSE CEDES POWER TO CHINA, HARMS DEVELOPMENT OF ‘DEMOCRATIC' AI, EXPERTS WARN SENATE Fox News poll on AI (Fox News) The Pentagon is already looking at how it can use AI to more quickly make strategic or battlefield assessments, and the Federal Trade Commission is looking closely at how AI systems are advertised in case those ads lead to misperceptions among consumers about their benefits. And in anticipation of the need to regulate AI, congressional leaders are meeting with experts to learn about the issue. Last week alone, Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., met with billionaire technology entrepreneur Elon Musk; House lawmakers met with two experts from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and are hoping to meet with OpenAI CEO Sam Altman. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP CLICK HERE FOR TOPLINE AND CROSS TABS Conducted April 21-24, 2023, under the joint direction of Beacon Research (D) and Shaw & Company Research (R), this Fox News Poll includes interviews with 1,004 registered voters nationwide who were randomly selected from a voter file and spoke with live interviewers on both landlines and cellphones. The total sample has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points. Pete Kasperowicz is a politics editor at Fox News Digital. More from Politics 5 hours ago Fox News Campus Radicals Newsletter: UCLA mob mess, veiled threats of violence and a major win over DEI 7 hours ago Florida Dem filed for re-election days before resignation as House Ethics Committee ramped up pressure 8 hours ago Mamdani in the hot seat after first veto derails bipartisan effort to combat antisemitism: 'Disappointed' 9 hours ago Transgender lawmaker 'doesn't know what a woman is,' White House says after dig at Trump firings Fox News Politics Get the latest updates from the 2024 campaign trail, exclusive interviews and more Fox News politics content. Arrives Weekdays By entering your email and clicking the Subscribe button, you agree to the Fox News Privacy Policy and Terms of Use , and agree to receive content and promotional communications from Fox News. You understand that you can opt-out at any time. Subscribe Subscribed Subscribe You've successfully subscribed to this newsletter! Continue