URL: https://www.vanityfair.com/news/2018/02/youtube-conspiracy-problem

YouTube Struggles to Contain Its Conspiracy Problem | Vanity Fair Skip to main content YouTube YouTube Struggles to Contain Its Conspiracy Problem Tech companies are losing the war to control their own algorithms. By Maya Kosoff February 8, 2018 Save Story Save this story Save Story Save this story Mark Warner, one of the Senate’s most insistent tech critics, turned his attention to YouTube this week after a Guardian report found that the company’s recommendation algorithm had surfaced inflammatory anti- Hillary Clinton videos six times more than anti- Donald Trump videos in the lead-up to the 2016 election. “Companies like YouTube have immense power and influence in shaping the media and content that users see,” he warned in a statement Monday. “I’ve been increasingly concerned that the recommendation engine algorithms behind platforms like YouTube are, at best, intrinsically flawed in optimizing for outrageous, salacious, and often fraudulent content.” Warner’s concerns about YouTube’s recommendation engine aren’t unfounded, nor are they limited to re-litigating the presidential election. A Wall Street Journal investigation this week revealed how YouTube’s algorithms drive confirmation bias by pushing users toward more ideologically extreme content, even when they’re not looking for it. YouTube’s recommendation algorithm, the Journal found, leads users to channels with hyper-partisan perspectives and misleading information. If a user shows a particular political bias, YouTube’s algorithm will recommend videos to that user that echo similar political biases, but with more extreme viewpoints. In a world with an endless supply of ever more conspiratorial content, critics fear it’s a recipe for radicalization. The issue derives, in part, from YouTube’s ad-based revenue model. Current and former engineers told the Journal that YouTube’s algorithm has been optimized to make the site “sticky”—to keep users coming back with recommended videos they’ll want to keep watching, generating additional ad impressions. And while YouTube’s algorithm isn’t specifically seeking out extremist content to show users, it does look for videos that will bring in traffic and keep users hooked to the screen. Those videos often happen to include sensationalist or conspiratorial content. YouTube is hardly the only tech company under fire, of course: Facebook has struggled for over a year to tamp down the wave of “fake news” stories that overwhelmed its feed during the last election, and Twitter is looking at ways to lower the temperature on the screaming information wars between rival political factions online. But some questions about YouTube’s algorithm, and its apparent inability to control how it is exploited by bad actors, are unique to the platform. Last year, a series of exposés revealed how YouTube’s algorithm had been tricked by a mix of content farms and potential child predators into generating a slurry of violent, creepy, and bizarre video recommendations for young children using the site. Parents might set their child down in front of a kid-appropriate cartoon video, only to find an hour later that the recommendation algorithm had taken them down a rabbit hole of computer-generated, increasingly disturbing iterations. Weeks later, YouTube responded by deleting some 150,000 videos that appeared to show children in distress. The problem of extremist and conspiratorial political content is a separate but related issue. In both cases, it seems that YouTube has either lost control of its algorithm—allowing the recommendation engine to trade accuracy for clicks—or is failing to stop content creators from manipulating the system to their own ends. YouTube acknowledged that such recommendations are problematic. “We recognize that this is our responsibility,” YouTube’s product-management chief for recommendations, Johanna Wright, told the Journal, “and we have more to do.” As of last week, the company is mulling a design change to fight misinformation in the wake of breaking-news events, when YouTube, like Facebook, often sees a flood of conspiracy theories. Such was the case with last month’s fatal Amtrak crash: top results on YouTube in the hours after the crash included videos from conspiracy theorist Alex Jones, Fox News, conspiracy vloggers, and, further down, a handful of local news affiliates. YouTube’s overhaul is still very much in its earliest stages, given the difficulty of identifying conspiratorial content without human intervention. In the meantime, YouTube plans to label all videos from state-funded broadcasters, which run the gamut from RT, Russia’s state news organization and a known propaganda outlet, to the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS). But there’s no easy editorial fix for digital companies that manage millions of new posts, videos, and other uploaded content every hour. Facebook was the first tech giant to face national scrutiny for its inability to police content, in the wake of an election cycle that saw the platform hijacked by Russia. But practically every social-media platform that relies on user-generated content faces similar problems when it comes to quality control. While Silicon Valley mastered the ability to keep users engaged, far less thought ever went into the consequences. YouTube’s own struggle to diagnose, let alone treat, the underlying illness is a worrisome sign that the brightest minds in tech are still playing catch-up when it comes to their creations. Maya Kosoff Maya Kosoff writes about tech for VF.com. Her work has appeared in Business Insider, Slate, Inc., Entrepreneur, and she has appeared on CNBC's Closing Bell, Good Morning America, Entertainment Tonight, and Huffington Post Live. Maya graduated with her bachelor’s in magazine journalism from the Newhouse School of Public Communications at ... Read More Read More Business Can a Pro-Tech Podcast Solve OpenAI’s PR Woes? This winter, OpenAI hit a comms rock bottom. Will its acquisition of the cult favorite show TBPN be enough to turn it around? By Julia Black Tech Mega Influencers Are Replacing Themselves With AI Clones AI-generated “digital twins” of influencers and celebrities are popping up all over the place, and managing this revolution is a major priority for talent agencies like CAA. But will audiences truly respond to a digital facsimile of the star they think they know and love? By Taylor Lorenz Business Exclusive: OpenAI Preps Policy Push to “Rethink the Social Contract” Is OpenAI’s chief futurist prepping for a major breakthrough or just another hype cycle? By Julia Black Culture Clavicular’s Family Is “Very Concerned” After His Hospitalization, According to a Source “He doesn’t have the normal infrastructure of a celebrity,” a source close to the “looksmaxxing” influencer, born Braden Peters, tells VF. “It’s a lot of money, it’s a lot of pressure for a very young person—especially for a man who is neurodivergent.” By Erin Vanderhoof Television Awards Season Is Over. Strike Season Has Just Begun. Vanity Fair spoke with several industry insiders—including producers at major production companies and members of both the writers and actors unions—about the landscape heading into negotiations. By Maxwell Adler News California Knife Fight: These Democrats Are Vying for Swalwell’s Voters Now that the congressman has suspended his gubernatorial campaign, the field is suddenly wide open—though some political operatives aren’t impressed: “This is the best we got?” By Maxwell Adler Television Reality TV Is Straining Under the Weight of Scandal. Can It Go On Like This? With an explosive Taylor Frankie Paul video taking down The Bachelorette and other veteran shows struggling to find relevance, the Little Gold Men team takes a look at what is and isn’t working in reality TV. By Rebecca Ford Movies All the Drama Around Zendaya and Robert Pattinson’s The Drama, Explained A24’s dark comedy about a wedding gone wrong has sparked both intrigue and controversy—thanks to the film’s shocking twist and the past behavior of its director. By Chris Murphy Politics 11 Scientists Are Dead or Missing. It Was Only a Matter of Time Before Conspiracy Theories Hit the White House. A haphazard grouping of recent cases emerged from what one paranormal investigator describes as “mystery-mongering data mining.” It also made for ideal fodder for the president and our leading media personalities alike. By Dan Adler Style What I Learned After Getting Kicked Out of Alix Earle’s Beverly Hills Pop-up Maxwell Adler happened upon a line of girlies waiting for Earle’s skin-care brand, Reale Actives, at a TikTok famous cafe and asked them about the beef with Alex Cooper. “I don’t think there’s anything else happening in the world except for this feud,” one said. By Maxwell Adler Business As Teens, They Founded a Billion-Dollar Startup. Now They Want to Shape the Future. Cam Fink, John Kessler, and Ned Koh founded the AI unicorn Aaru when they were 18, 15, and 19. Now they've got even bigger ambitions. By Julia Black News Tony Dokoupil Is the Face of the Bari Weiss Revolution at CBS News. Will He Survive It? With tumbling ratings and savage reviews, the hospital-drama-handsome anchor has hit a rough patch after a meteoric rise at CBS. Insiders are questioning whether he’s up for the job—and panicking at the show’s coziness with the Trump administration. Through it all, Dokoupil has come to represent the Weiss era. By Aidan McLaughlin