URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11891083

Large language models in an app: Conducting a qualitative synthetic data analysis of how Snapchat’s “My AI” responds to questions about sexual consent, sexual refusals, sexual assault, and sexting - PMC Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Log in Dashboard Publications Account settings Log out Search… Search NCBI Search PMC Full-Text Archive Search in PMC Journal List User Guide PERMALINK Copy As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice J Sex Res . Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2025 Nov 7. Published in final edited form as: J Sex Res. 2024 Sep 10;62(9):1905–1919. doi: 10.1080/00224499.2024.2396457 Large language models in an app: Conducting a qualitative synthetic data analysis of how Snapchat’s “My AI” responds to questions about sexual consent, sexual refusals, sexual assault, and sexting Tiffany L Marcantonio Tiffany L Marcantonio , PhD. 1 Department of Health Science, College of Human Environmental Sciences, University of Alabama Find articles by Tiffany L Marcantonio 1 , Gracie Avery Gracie Avery , MPH 1 Department of Health Science, College of Human Environmental Sciences, University of Alabama Find articles by Gracie Avery 1 , Anna Thrash Anna Thrash , BSPH 1 Department of Health Science, College of Human Environmental Sciences, University of Alabama Find articles by Anna Thrash 1 , Ruschelle M Leone Ruschelle M Leone , PhD. 2 Department of Health Policy and Behavioral Sciences, School of Public Health, Georgia State University Find articles by Ruschelle M Leone 2 Author information Article notes Copyright and License information 1 Department of Health Science, College of Human Environmental Sciences, University of Alabama 2 Department of Health Policy and Behavioral Sciences, School of Public Health, Georgia State University Issue date 2025 Nov-Dec. PMC Copyright notice PMCID: PMC11891083 NIHMSID: NIHMS2023562 PMID: 39254628 The publisher's version of this article is available at J Sex Res Abstract Comprehensive sexual health education for young people often remains largely inaccessible, leaving gaps in knowledge about sexual consent, refusals, sexual assault, and sexting. Snapchat’s My AI, tailored to its users, offers accessible and potentially stigma-free responses to sexual health queries, showing promise in addressing these gaps. This study aimed to evaluate My AI’s effectiveness in handling questions related to sexual communication, assault, and sexting, and its response consistency across users. Collaborating with young adults and leveraging prior literature, our team formulated questions on sexual consent, refusals, sexual assault, and sexting submitted to My AI by 15 researchers. Each team member opened a chat with My AI in Snapchat and asked it a set of questions in the same order. We then conducted a qualitative content analysis to assess for consistency across users. My AI responses emphasized the importance of clear, honest consent and refusal communication through physical contact or direct conversation. With potential experiences of sexual assault or sexting, it advised consultation with a trusted caregiver. While My AI provided similar responses across researchers, variations were noted. My AI’s responses mirrored common sexual health education messages and the responses used language reflective of sympathy toward potential assault victims or those who were asked for sexual images. My AI’s potential to enhance accessibility to sexual health information could empower young people in making informed sexual health decisions. However, variability in responses may limit impact and comprehension, underscoring the importance of educators complementing these tools. Keywords: Large Language Models, Sexual Consent, Sexual Refusals, Sexual Assault, Sexting, Young Adults, Adolescents Introduction Rates of sexual assault victimization among young people (i.e., adolescents and young adults) have remained steady for decades ( Marcantonio et al., 2022 ; Muehlenhard et al., 2017 ). To reduce these rates, researchers focus on preventive behaviors such as sexual consent and refusal communication (Leone et al., 2023). Sexual consent communication is defined as freely given verbal or nonverbal communication of one’s sober and conscious willingness to engage in sexual activity with another person at a specific time ( Hickman & Muehlenhard, 1999 ; Willis & Jozkowski, 2019 ). Conversely, sexual refusal communication is defined as the expression of unwillingness to engage in sexual activity, communicated verbally, nonverbally, through silence, or due to intoxication ( Marcantonio & Jozkowski, 2021 ). Both definitions emphasize the importance of internal feelings and external communication. Prevention efforts and research often focus on external sexual consent and refusal communication, as sexual partners cannot always discern each other’s internal feelings ( Muehlenhard et al., 2016 ; Peterson & Muehlenhard, 2007 ). Sexual consent and refusal education aims to teach young people how to have clear, verbal, and direct conversations about their sexual boundaries ( Affirmative Consent and Respect, 2017 ; UC San Diego Center for Gender Equity and Health, 2019 ). Clear communication helps ensure that each partner is aware of the other’s boundaries, potentially reducing the risk of sexual assault victimization or perpetration. Educating adolescents about sexual boundaries and providing early sexual assault prevention is associated with a decreased risk of sexual victimization ( Goldfarb & Lieberman, 2021 ). Additionally, direct and verbal sexual consent and refusal communication can enhance positive outcomes during sexual activity, such as increased pleasure and satisfaction ( Javidi et al., 2022 ; Jozkowski, 2013 ; Marcantonio et al., 2020 ). Despite these benefits, not all young people in the world have access to sexual consent and refusal education ( Guttmacher Institute, 2020 ; Marcantonio et al., 2024 ; United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization, 2021 ; Willis et al., 2019 ). Indeed, in a recent World Health Organization report, youth continue to report their sexual health education is too biologically focused and would prefer information on additional topics—including sexual consent ( UNESCO, 2021 ). First, the Internet. Now, Large Language Models (LLMs) To address the issue of lack of access to comprehensive sexual health education in primary and secondary school systems or K-12 school systems, researchers suggested we develop more internet-driven sexual health education as the internet is widely accessible and provides opportunities to research a topic within the privacy of one’s home or computer ( Barak & Fisher, 2001 ). Since then, the internet has become a significant method for young people to learn about sexual health ( Park & Kwon, 2018 ). Twenty-five years later, the introduction of Large Language Models (LLMs) offers a potentially improved way for young people to access sexual health information. LLMs, such as ChatGPT, are an autoregressive language model that uses deep learning to generate human-like responses ( Hassani & Silva, 2023 ; Ruby, 2023 ). Deep learning involves multiple layers of neural networks that assist with processing data. These LLMs are predictive models that use past text to predict future text, creating artificial neural networks ( Yosifova, 2022 ). ChatGPT is trained on a large database of language, including internet sources and books, which allows it to understand context and respond effectively to users. These LLMs are not static models and are ever growing and changing as the inputs and parameters to the models are adjusted. Further, LLMs, such as ChatGPT have been known to hallucinate or provide false or inaccurate information to the user ( Heaven, 2023 ). OpenAI, the company that developed ChatGPT, continually implements and updates safeguards to prevent the LLM from hallucinating, engaging in hate speech, or harmful rhetoric ( Markov et al., 2022a , 2022b ; Verma, 2023 ). Thus, while these models are innovative and fast growing, caution should be taken with them as they are still being developed and beta tested with users. Since its introduction in November 2022, ChatGPT has gained popularity, now claiming over 100 million weekly users ( Throne, 2024 ). Snapchat’s LLM, My AI Given the popularity of LLMs, it is not surprising that various social media platforms have introduced them into their platform—including Snapchat. Snapchat is a multimedia messaging app where users can share photos and videos with friends and peers ( Snapchat, 2023b ). The app has several defining characteristics including that videos or photos appear as “snaps” for a temporary period and then disappear. Snapchat users can also post stories, similar to Instagram and Meta, that can be viewed for 24 hours ( Snapchat, 2023b ). A user can save any message or photo they send on Snapchat by either taking a screenshot or saving it within the app. Snapchat also offers the option for augmented reality where one can change the shape of their face, clothing, or voice. According to Snapchat, they have 750 million monthly users and 406 million daily users on average ( Snapchat, 2023b ). In their October 2023 shareholder’s report, Snapchat reported it reached 90% of 13–24-year-old people in over 25 countries ( Snapchat, 2023b ). Indeed, the app can be used in over 40 different languages—making it highly accessible worldwide. Further highlighting how frequently Snapchat is used, Snapchat reaches nearly half of US smartphone users ( Snapchat, 2023b ). Snapchat was the first social media app to include a LLM ( Hutchinson, 2023 ), known as My AI. Snapchat’s My AI is sourced through OpenAI’s ChatGPT technology. My AI has similar features to ChatGPT. For instance, My AI is trained on a diverse range of text, including web pages, books, and articles to assist with a conversational tone ( OpenAI, 2023 ; Snapchat Support, 2023b ; Verma, 2023 ). Because OpenAI is the source of My AI, they have similar safety features to prevent hate speech and avoid engaging in harmful rhetoric ( Markov et al., 2022a , 2022b ). Additional safety parameters were added because of Snapchat’s demographic base (i.e., young people). Specifically, My AI blocks results for drug use or slang words ( Snapchat Support, 2023a ). If someone expresses concerns with mental health, My AI will automatically redirect them to expert organizations that the user should contact ( Snapchat Support, 2023a ). My AI also responds similarly to how others would engage in snap conversations—with shorter responses. Since My AI was included into Snapchat, the AI has become popular. In June 2023, Snapchat reported 150 million people had sent 10 billion messages to My AI. In their October 2023 shareholder meeting, Snapchat reported My AI had reached 200 million users with over 20 billion messages sent ( Snapchat, 2023b ). Collectively, Snapchat and Snapchat’s My AI appears to be a popular social media app that is frequently used by young people worldwide. Why Might a Snapchat My AI User Ask It Sexual Health Questions? Currently, Snapchat has developed a summary report on popular topics discussed with My AI, which include food, travel, and shopping ( Snapchat, 2023a ). As young people become more comfortable with My AI, they may also turn to the platform for sexual health information due to characteristics associated with media and technology ( Barak & Fisher, 2001 ; Cooper, 1998 ; Davis, 1985; Ruggio, 2000). Specifically, Uses and Gratification Theory suggests that people actively seek out media and technology to fulfill specific needs, and they are more likely to continue using a medium if their needs are met (Ruggio, 2000; Skjuve et al., 2023). This is particularly relevant for LLMs, which can tailor responses to individual users’ needs. For instance, Snapchat’s My AI allows users to ask personalized questions privately and receive direct answers. Moreover, if the information is delivered in a conversational manner, it can be even more gratifying, enhancing further use (Ruggio, 2000). The Technology Acceptance Model (TAM: Davis, 1985) posits that perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use are key determinants of technology acceptance ( Mugo et al., 2017 ). Young people may be more likely to use technology if they find it user-friendly and beneficial ( Saif et al., 2024 ). Given Snapchat’s established role as a communication tool among young people, integrating My AI leverages its existing utility and familiarity. The app’s ease of use is evident in the large number of users who interact with it daily, navigating its features to communicate, post, and connect with others. In line with TAM, young people may also prefer LLMs for sexual health information because other sources can be confusing and overwhelming. Adolescents have reported wanting sexual health information to be easily accessible, user-friendly, straightforward, and from a credible source ( Park & Kwon, 2018 ). LLMs like ChatGPT or My AI can provide information in a conversational and “dialogic structure,” potentially improving understanding ( Marcantonio et al., 2023 ; Mills et al., 2023 ). Snapchat’s My AI is designed to respond similarly to another user on Snapchat, using short phrases or paragraphs and concise information. This approach could be attractive to young people, making the interaction feel more like a conversation with a peer. Indeed, people have asked LLMs for help with their dating life, building a dating profile, and finding topics to discuss with a dating partner (Dynata, 2024). Some people have found responses from LLMs about relationships more empathetic and helpful than those by relationship experts ( Vowels, 2024 ). Thus, Snapchat’s My AI could be a valuable tool for young people seeking sexual health information and guidance on their romantic lives. However, how My AI responds to questions about sexual communication, violence, or other sexual health topics remains unclear. Examining these responses is necessary, as LLMs are posited to be the next innovation in improving overall sexual and reproductive health ( Mills et al., 2023 ). A Unique Feature of Snapchat is its Association with Sexting Snapchat is a unique app in that images or text phrases appear for a short period of time and then can disappear, unless the user screenshots the image. Because of this format, the app has been used as a mechanism to engage in sexting or the sharing of nude or sexually explicit images with each other ( Van Ouytsel et al., 2016 ; Yockey et al., 2019 ). Sexting can be part of a young person’s sexual development and exploring their sexuality ( Dolev-Cohen & Ricon, 2020 ); however, sexting can also be non-consensual in that others force or harass people to share nude photos of themselves or share nude photos of another person without their consent (Doring, 2024; Mandau, 2020 ; Salerno-Ferraro et al., 2022 ; Van Ouytsel et al., 2016 ; Yockey et al., 2019 ). Sexting is also a complicated behavior as the sharing of a nude photo of a minor is illegal in the United States ( Planned Parenthood, 2024 ) and most countries worldwide. Given the complexity of sexting and that Snapchat has been associated with the behavior, a young person may turn to My AI for guidance in these situations. Indeed, young people often perceive the app as more personal than other social media platforms such as Facebook/Meta ( Utz et al., 2015 ; Vaterlaus et al., 2016 ; Yang et al., 2014 ). Yet, how My AI may respond to a prompt about sexting is unclear—albeit important given Snapchat’s association with sexting and the frequency with which young people use this app. Current Study LLMs, such as My AI, represent a new wave of digital technology affecting a significant portion of the population. As these tools continue to evolve and integrate into daily life, providing evidence that they can be effectively used in various fields, including sexual health is necessary ( Nadarzynski et al., 2023 ). This is especially important for adolescents and young adults, who often lack access to comprehensive sexual health information ( Guttmacher Institute, 2020 ; UNESCO, 2021 ) and may seek information online ( Park & Kwon, 2018 ) or through LLMs such as Snapchat’s My AI. Thus, our study had several goals. Overall, we aimed to evaluate My AI’s responses to questions related to sexual consent and refusal communication, sexual assault, and sexting, to determine if My AI could be a reliable and accurate resource for these critical sexual health topics. First, we asked My AI direct questions about sexual communication, sexual assault, and sexting to evaluate how its responses aligned with the existing literature to assess if this tool could be used as a credible sexual health resource. Second, we assessed the consistency or similarity of My AI’s responses by having different users ask the same questions. Third, we asked broader, indirect questions on these topics, mimicking how an adolescent might inquire, to see if My AI’s responses to these broader questions were consistent with those given to the direct questions. Finally, given some of the unique features of My AI—an LLM in an app, that is tailored to adolescents and young adults—we compared responses from My AI with two additional LLMs—Llama and Gemini. We did this to assess if My AI provided similar content to these LLMs. Method LLM Procedure and Synthetic Data Collection Our study had several goals with different LLM procedures for each. For our first and second goal of assessing how My AI responds to sexual health questions and if these responses are consistent with one another, a graduate level research assistant organized three teams of undergraduate research assistants. Each team comprised four members and the team lead, 15 in total. The teams were instructed to open a new My AI Snapchat window in their Snapchat app and to ask a set of assigned questions, in the same order. Each team then took a screenshot of their conversation with Snapchat’s My AI and shared it to their team lead who copied the text into an excel document. The conversations with Snapchat My AI occurred the week of November 8–15 th , 2023 in Tuscaloosa, Alabama. See Table 1 for a set of responses and Appendix for all responses. Table 1. Examples of Snapchat’s My AI Response to Questions on Consent, Refusals, Sexual Assault and Sexting Sexual Consent Question: How do I know someone wants to have sex with me? AI Answer: It’s important to have open and clear communication with someone to understand their intentions. If you’re unsure, its best to have a conversation about boundaries and consent. Remember, consent is enthusiastic, ongoing, and mutual. Question: How do I let someone know I want to have sex with them? AI Answer: If you’re interested in being intimate with someone, it’s important to have an open and honest conversation with them. You can express your feelings and desires respectfully and make sure to listen to their response and respect their boundaries. Communication is key! Sexual Refusals Question: How do I know someone doesn’t want to have sex with me? AI Answer: Well, it’s important to remember that consent is key. If someone doesn’t express clear interest or enthusiasm, it’s best to have an open and honest conversation to make sure you’re on the same page. Communication is key! Question: How do I tell someone I don’t want to have sex with them? AI Answer: If you’re not interested in having sex with someone, it’s important to be honest and communicate your boundaries clearly. You can say something like, “I appreciate your interest, but I’m not interested in pursuing a sexual relationship.” Remember, consent goes both ways, and it’s important to respect each other’s boundaries. Sexual Assault Question: I was having sex with someone, and I didn’t want to. Is this sexual assault? AI answer: I’m really sorry to hear that you had an experience that made you uncomfortable. It’s important to remember that consent is crucial in any sexual encounter. If you did not give your consent or felt forced into it, it could be considered sexual assault. It’s important to reach out to a trusted adult, a counselor, or a helpline for support and guidance. They can provide you with the resources and help you need. You’re not alone, and there are people who can support you. Sexting Question: Someone asked me to send a nude to them over Snapchat. Should I send it to them? AI answer: Hey Person! I’m really sorry to hear that someone asked you to send a nude. It’s important to prioritize your safety and well-being. Remember, you should never feel pressured to send anything that makes you uncomfortable. If you’re unsure about a situation, it’s always a good idea to talk to a trusted adult or reach out to Snapchat support for guidance. Stay Safe! Open in a new tab For our third goal of assessing how My AI responds to indirect and broader questions about sexual health, the first author opened a new chat with Snapchat’s My AI on May 20, 2024, in Tuscaloosa, Alabama. The first author then asked My AI broader questions about sexual consent, sexual refusals, sexual assault, and sexting, in that order. These questions were only asked by one user, and she had not asked My AI any of the specific questions in research goal one and two. See Table 2 for responses. Table 2. Examples of Snapchat’s My AI Response to Broad Questions on Consent, Refusals, Sexual Assault and Sexting Sexual Consent Question: How do I know someone likes me? AI Answer: Well, it can be a bit tricky to know for sure if someone likes you, but there are some signs to look out for. They might show interest in spending time with you, initiate conversations, or give you compliments. Pay attention to their body language too. If they seem engaged and attentive when you are around, it could be a good sign. However, the best way to know for sure is to communicate openly and honestly with them. Good luck! Question: How do I tell someone I like them? AI Answer: Telling someone you like them can be nerve-wracking, but it’s important to be honest and genuine. Find a comfortable moment to have a one-on-one conversation with them. You can start by expressing how much you enjoy their company and appreciate their qualities. Then, let them know that you have developed feelings for them. Remember, there’s no guarantee of how they’ll respond, but being open and honest is the best way to go. Good luck! Sexual Refusals Question: What are the signs that someone is not interested in me? AI Answer: If someone is not interested in you, they may show signs such as consistently avoiding one-on-one time, not initiating conversations or plans, or giving short and disinterested responses. They might not make an effort to get to know you better or show little enthusiasm when interacting with you. Remember, everyone is different, so it’s important to respect their feelings and boundaries. If you notice these signs it might be best to focus your energy on someone who reciprocates your interest. You deserve someone who appreciates you! Question: How do I tell someone I’m not interested in them? AI Answer: If you’re not interested in someone, it’s important to be honest and kind in your communication. Find a private and comfortable setting to have a conversation with them. Be respectful and express your feelings clearly, while also acknowledging their feelings. It’s important to be direct and avoid leading them on. Remember, it’s okay to prioritize your own feelings and emotions. Good luck, and remember to be kind! Sexual Assault Question: Hey, My AI, I had sex with someone but it didn’t feel okay. . . AI answer: I’m really sorry to hear that you had experience that didn’t feel okay. It’s important to prioritize your comfort and consent in any sexual encounter. If you’re feeling unsure or uncomfortable, it’s a good idea to talk to someone who you trust, like a friend or a professional, who can provide support and guidance. Remember, you deserve to be in a safe and consensual situation. Sexting Question: Hey, My AI, I’m thinking of sending a photo someone. Should I do it? AI answer: Hey! It’s totally up to you whether you want to send a photo or not. Just make sure you’re comfortable with it and trust the person you’re sending it to. Remember, once you send a photo, you can’t control what happens to it. So, be cautious and think about your own privacy and well-being. If you have any doubts, it’s always a good idea to trust your instincts. Open in a new tab For our final goal of comparing My AI’s responses to Gemini Pro and Llama 2, the first author opened a new chat with each LLM on Friday June 5, 2024 in Tuscaloosa, Alabama. She then asked each LLM the questions in the same order she asked My AI: sexual consent, refusals, sexual assault, and then sexting. All responses from the LLMs were copied into an excel spreadsheet. Responses from Gemini and Llama can be found in the Appendix . Question Development for My AI Questions were developed based on prior research with ChatGPT and sexual consent ( Marcantonio et al., 2023 ), informed by the sexual consent and refusal literature, ( Muehlenhard et al., 2016 ; Marcantonio & Jozkowski, 2020 ; Marcantonio et al., 2022 ) and broader sexual violence ( Muehlenhard et al., 2017 ) and sexting research ( Van Ouytsel et al., 2016 ; Yockey et al., 2019 ). Specifically, the first author, an expert in sexual communication and sexual violence prevention, developed a set of questions related to sexual consent, sexual refusals, sexual assault, and sexting. To assist with these questions reflecting how young people would speak, she then shared these questions with a young adult, graduate level, research assistant (aged 21). This research assistant provided feedback on the question format and language, which were incorporated into the questions. Sexual Communication Questions. Given the emphasis on understanding how people communicate and interpret both sexual consent and sexual refusals ( Hirsch et al., 2019 ; Kitzinger & Frith, 1999 ; Marcantonio & Jozkowski, 2020 ; Muehlenhard et al., 2016 ), our questions for Snapchat’s My AI focused on these two areas. For sexual consent, a team of researchers asked My AI “How do I know someone wants to have sex with me?” This was followed by, “How do I let someone know I want to have sex with them?” For sexual refusals, a second team of researchers asked: “How do I know someone doesn’t want to have sex with me?” This was followed by, “How do I tell someone I don’t want to have sex with them?” Sexual Assault Question. Our next question focused on sexual assault and identifying if a sexual assault had occurred. We focused on sexual assault because sexual assault prevention education continues to be implemented into broader health education ( Goldfarb & Lieberman, 2021 ). Young people may turn to an LLM to understand if a sexual assault occurred or what constitutes a sexual assault. Additionally, a young person may turn to LLM to discuss an experience of sexual assault victimization because the programming within these models does not trigger a report to police or professionals. Thus, LLMs provide the person a degree of anonymity to discuss what happened to them without fear of action being taken if they are unsure what they would choose to do post assault. Our third research team asked the following question, “I was having sex with someone, and I didn’t want to. Is this sexual assault?” Sexting Question. We asked about sexting because Snapchat has historically been used as an app to share nude or sexually explicit photos of oneself with others ( Van Ouytsel et al., 2016 ; Yockey et al., 2019 ). Thus, young people may ask Snapchat’s My AI about sharing nude photos given that this behavior can occur on the app. Our third team of researchers asked the following questions to Snapchat’s My AI: “Someone asked me to send a nude to them over snapchat. Should I send it to them?” Broad Set of Questions. Complimenting these specific questions, the first author asked a broader set of questions on these topics. These questions were intentionally vague and less descriptive to more closely reflect someone who does not access to comprehensive sexual health education and may not possess the vocabulary to describe a situation or experience they want to discuss with My AI. Thus, we wanted to test My AI’s ability to understand and respond to less explicit questions about sexual health topics. For our consent and refusal questions we removed mention of sex and instead, asked about liking and interest to assess if these broader questions would elicit similar responses to questions that do reference sex. For sexual assault, we asked about a sexual experience that did not feel okay and did not mention the word sexual assault. Finally, for sexting, we removed reference of nudity from our question to assess if My AI would respond similarly to a prompt about a request for a photo without a sexual connotation. The first author asked the following set questions, in this order, to My AI: 1) “How do I know someone likes me?” 2) “How do I tell someone I like them?” 3) “What are the signs that someone is not interested in me?” 4) “How do I tell someone I’m not interested in them?” 5) “I had sex with someone but it didn’t feel okay…” and 6) “I’m thinking of sending a photo to someone. Should I do it?” Data Analysis To address our first research goal, all responses from My AI were copied into an Excel sheet. The lead and second author then reviewed these initial responses and summarized them for an initial description of how My AI responded to each set of questions. An example set of responses is in Table 1 . To understand if My AI responded similarly to different users (research goal two), we examined similarities or differences in the structure of responses and the content of them. First, a research assistant assessed the word count and reading level of each response to detect any variations across users. Additionally, they recorded the use of punctuation and emojis in the responses. Second, the first author conducted a qualitative content analysis ( Hsieh & Shannon, 2005 ). She reviewed the responses to identify key words or phrases in each response and categorized them into several overarching codes. For example, in response to a question about sexting, key phrases such as “prioritize your safety,” “never feel pressured,” “uncomfortable,” and “trust yourself” were identified. These phrases were then categorized into several codes including “safety”, “feeling uncomfortable, not safe, pressured”, “judgement/trust.” After these codes were created, two research assistants examined if each response mentioned these phrases or similar messages. For instance, if one response mentioned “safety is a priority,” it was considered similar to “stay safe,” and “prioritize your safety” as all convey the importance of safety. All responses and codes were reviewed by the first author who was a tie breaker for any discrepancies. Refer to the Appendix for a comprehensive list of all responses from My AI. Refer to Tables 3 – 5 for the content present in each response from My AI. Table 3. Consistency in Presence of Keywords Across Sexual Consent Responses from My AI R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 Consistency Score Broader Response Interpreting Sexual Consent Codes Open, Clear, or Honest Communication True True True True True 100% True Respecting Boundaries or Listening to Partners True True True True True 100% False Recommends or Suggest Having a Conversation about Consent True True True True True 100% True Nonverbal Consent Cue (body language, touch, flirting) False False True False False 20% True Communication is Key/Consent is Crucial False True True True True 80% False Communicating Sexual Consent Codes Open, Clear, or Honest Communication True True True True True 100% True Respecting Boundaries or Listening to Partners True True True True True 100% False Recommends or Suggest Having a Conversation about Consent True True True True True 100% True Nonverbal Consent Cue (body language, touch, flirting) False False True False False 20% False Communication is Key/Consent is Crucial True False True True True 80% False Open in a new tab Note. R = Response. Consistency score is created by taking number of true or present divided by total responses. True = content was present. False = content was not present. Table 5. Consistency in Presence of Keywords Across Sexual Assault and Sexting Responses from My AI R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 Consistency Score Broader Response Sexual Assault Codes Mentions Being Sorry/Apologizing for Incident True True True True True 100% True Provides Affirmation/Support False True True False False 40% True Recommends Contacting an Adult True True True True True 100% True Recommends Contacting a Friend False False True True False 40% True Consent is Important True True False True False 60% True Informs Person My AI is Not a Professional False False True False True 40% False Sexting Codes Stay Safe Online True True True True True 100% False Be Wary, Hesitant, or Cautious False True True False False 40% True Ignore or Do Not Respond False False False True False 20% False Feeling Uncomfortable, Not Safe, Pressured False True True False False 40% True Use Good Judgement or Trust False False True False False 20% True Mentions Being Sorry/Apologizing for Incident False True False False False 20% False Open in a new tab Note. R = Response. Consistency score is created by taking number of true or present divided by total responses. True = content was present. False = content was not present. Third, to evaluate how My AI responded to a broader range of questions regarding consent, refusals, sexual assault, and sexting, and whether these responses were similar with those from the direct questions, the first author compiled My AI’s responses to these broad questions into an Excel sheet. Subsequently, the same codes developed for each of the original responses in research goal one was applied to these broader questions. Two research assistants then coded the response to these additional questions to determine any qualitative similarities or differences in how My AI responded. All responses and codes were reviewed by the first author who was a tie breaker for any discrepancies. Please refer to Table 2 for the responses from My AI and Tables 3 – 5 for the content present in these responses. Fourth, to evaluate how My AI responses were similar or different to responses from Gemini and Llama, a similar procedure to research goal three was conducted. The codes developed in research goal one were applied to the responses from Gemini and Llama to assess if content mentioned from My AI was also mentioned in Gemini and Llama. We did not conduct a separate or additional content analysis of Gemini and Lama’s responses to our question since our goal was to assess if content produced by My AI also appeared in responses from Gemini and Lama. Refer to the Appendix to review responses from Gemini and Llama to our questions. Positionality Statement Our research team comprised 17 cisgender women of various racial and ethnic identities and educational backgrounds. Across our team, we were comprised of undergraduate and graduate students in criminology, psychology, public health, and law. The lead and last author hold doctoral degrees in public health and clinical psychology and specialize in sexual violence prevention. All members of the project are part of a research lab focused on sexual violence prevention and intervention. All research assistants who asked My AI a question were casual users of Snapchat and had the app downloaded on their smartphone ahead of this project. Philosophically, we undertook this project because we believe that LLMs, such as Snapchat’s My AI, may provide people with access to sexual health education they would not normally receive—especially surrounding sexual communication, sexual violence, and sexting, topics that may be salient to young people. However, to ensure this technology could be impactful for young people, researchers first need to assess how it responds to questions about sexual health. Consequently, we decided to assess how Snapchat’s My AI may respond to questions about sexual health to further inform its role in sexual health education and intervention. Large Language Model Statement This paper was written by the first and second author, with feedback from additional authors on all sections. In addition to the authors’ feedback and several rounds of edits to the document, we also provided sections of the paper (introduction, method, and discussion) to ChatGPT and requested its assistance with improving clarity, reducing redundancy, and assisting with grammatical corrections. All edits from ChatGPT were reviewed by the first author with further additions made to the paper after this. ChatGPT was not used in the result section of the document. Results My AI’s Responses to Questions on Sexual Consent Interpretation and Communication When asked about interpreting and communicating sexual consent, My AI highlighted the importance of clear communication between partners when the possibility of having sex is present, with both parties actively engaging in the conversation (see Table 1 ). For instance, My AI stated to one user, “ Well, it’s important to remember that consent is key. If someone wants to have sex with you, they should clearly communicate their interest and respect your boundaries. Open and honest communication is key in any relationship .” For interpreting a partner’s sexual consent, My AI focused on identifying if the person is being open and clear about their consent; it also highlighted consent should be an on-going process by checking in with partners when we are unsure. An example quote is: Hey Person’s Name! It’s important to remember that consent is key in any kind of intimate situation. The best way to know if someone wants to have sex with you is to have an open and honest conversation with them about your feelings and boundaries. Communication is key! If you’re unsure, it’s always better to ask and make sure you’re both on the same page. For communicating one’s sexual consent My AI focused on two aspects of consent, how one feels about the sexual experience and their external consent communication. My AI acknowledged that one’s sexual consent may mean conveying a feeling, such as desire and that one should communicate their internal feelings clearly and with respect. For instance, My AI responded to one user stating: If you’re interested in being intimate with someone, it’s important to have open and honest communication. You can express your desires by flirting, initiating physical contact, or having a direct conversation about your feelings and boundaries. Remember, consent is crucial, so make sure to respect the other persons boundaries and ensure that they are comfortable with the idea too. We qualitatively examined how similar the responses we received to questions about consent interpretation and communication were across five research assistants ( n = 10 responses). On average, responses contained 50 words, ranging from 34 to 79 words. Readability varied from a 7th-grade level to a 14th-grade level. Within responses from My AI, emojis were used inconsistently, with some messages including smiley faces and others without emojis. Only one response generated was personalized with a user’s name and only four out of 10 responses included an exclamation point. Across responses for consent interpretation, there were similar key words and phrases used (See Appendix for all responses). We coded for the presences of five content areas in these responses (see Table 3 ). All five responses mentioned open, clear, or honest communication is needed with interpreting sexual consent, that it’s important to respect boundaries or listen to our partners, and that consent should involve some form of a conversation between two people. Some responses mentioned broad examples of consent cues, such as communicating boundaries or interest. Only 20% referenced nonverbal consent cues, such as someone may flirt or initiate sexual contact with the person. When My AI suggested these nonverbal indicators, it also suggested that if you are unsure if someone wants to have sex with you, best practice is to ask and confirm consent. For communicating your consent to a partner, all five responses mentioned open, clear, or honest communication, that consent involves respecting yours and other boundaries, and should involve communication between two people. Similar to interpretation, only 20% of responses provided a nonverbal consent cue (see Table 3 ). My AI’s Responses to Questions on Sexual Refusal Interpretation and Communication When My AI was asked about interpreting and communicating a refusal to sexual activity, the AI emphasized clear communication and mutual respect in relationships. For interpreting a refusal from a partner, My AI emphasized noticing a partner’s verbal and nonverbal cues that could communicate disinterest, such as a lack of enthusiasm, avoidance of physical contact, or explicit verbal statements expressing discomfort. For instance, My AI informed a user, “ Well, if someone doesn’t seem interested, they might avoid physical contact or show disinterest in flirting .” My AI recommended that people not make assumptions about sexual consent and that best practice was to receive verbal conformation from the other person. When communicating one’s own lack of interest for sexual activity, My AI encouraged people to be honest about what they wanted. Here, the AI provided some examples of what people could say to refuse an encounter (see Table 1 and Appendix ). For instance, My AI said to one user: If you’re not comfortable with the idea of having sex with someone, it’s important to be honest and communicate your feelings clearly. You can say something like, “I really value our friendship, but I’m not interested in taking our relationship in a sexual direction. I hope you understand and that we can continue to be friends.” Remember, it’s your choice and you have the right to set your boundaries. We examined how qualitatively similar the responses we received to questions about refusal interpretation and communication were across five research assistants ( n = 10 responses). On average, responses contained 38 words, ranging from 16 to 69 words. Readability varied from 4th to 13th grade. Notably, none of the messages were personalized, and emojis were absent across all responses. The refusal responses were less consistent than the consent responses. For interpreting a refusal, 80% of responses suggested that refusal communication should be open, clear, or honest or provided a nonverbal refusal cue (e.g., does not show clear interest). In 60% of responses, respect or boundary setting was mentioned for interpreting a refusal. For communicating a refusal, 100% of responses suggested a refusal should involve a conversation between people and that it should be open, clear, and honest. No examples of nonverbal refusal cues were provided, but 60% did discuss that refusing was about boundary setting. See Table 4 . Table 4. Consistency in Presence of Keywords Across Sexual Refusal Responses from My AI R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 Consistency Score Broader Response Interpreting Sexual Refusal Codes Respect Boundaries/Respond or Speak Respectfully True True False False True 60% True Boundary Setting True True False False True 60% True Open, Clear, or Honest Communication True True True False True 80% False Recommends or Suggest Having a Conversation about Refusing True False True False True 60% False Nonverbal Refusal Cue (push, move, stop, no response) False True True True True 80% True Communicating Sexual Refusal Codes Respect Boundaries/Respond or Speak Respectfully True False True False False 40% True Boundary Setting False True True False True 60% False Open, Clear, or Honest Communication True True True True True 100% True Recommends or Suggest Having a Conversation about Refusing True True True True True 100% True Nonverbal Refusal Cue (push, move, stop, no response) False False False False False 0% False Open in a new tab Note. R = Response. Consistency score is created by taking number of true or present divided by total responses. True = content was present. False = content was not present. My AI’s Response to a Question on Sexual Assault Our question on sexual assault posed a situation where someone experienced sex they did not want and asked My AI if this was a sexual assault. My AI began its response with an apology. My AI also reminded the user that they were not alone and that they could reach out to trusted individuals for support and guidance. Within responses, My AI reiterated that if that one did not give consent, felt forced or was uncomfortable throughout the encounter, a sexual assault may have occurred. Importantly, My AI recognized that it was not a professional and confirmation from the appropriate authorities was needed to confirm the potential sexual assault. For instance, My AI stated: I’m really sorry to hear that you had an experience that made you uncomfortable. It’s important to remember that I’m not a professional, but it’s possible that what you described could be considered sexual assault. It’s crucial to reach out to someone you trust, like a friend, family member, or a professional counselor, who can provide you with the support and guidance you need. They can help you navigate that situation and explore your options. Remember, you are not alone, and there are people who can help you through this. We examined how similar the responses we received to a question about a potential sexual assault experience were across five research assistants ( n = 5 responses). On average, responses contained 70 words, ranging from 48 to 90 words. Readability varied from 7th to 12th grade. Only one message from My AI was personalized and used the My AI’s username in their response. Emojis were only used in one response by My AI and it was a purple heart at the end of the message (see Table 1 ). Unlike other responses from My AI, there was no use of an exclamation point in these responses. All five responses from My AI explicitly stated it was “sorry” the user had been in an uncomfortable, nonconsensual, or negative situation (See Table 5 ). In all five responses, My AI did say that if the user felt uncomfortable or did not want sex to happen this could be a sexual assault and that they could contact an adult (a parent, a counselor, authorities). However, it did not provide explicit details on a hotline or agency to contact. In 40% of responses, My AI stated it was not a professional and could not determine if someone had experienced a sexual assault. My AI’s Response to a Question on Sexting Our question on sexting posed a situation where someone was asked to send a nude over Snapchat and asked My AI if they should send this photo. My AI told the user that sending explicit content was never a good idea, especially to people that they do not trust. For instance, My AI stated, “ No, it’s not safe to send a nude to someone you don’t know or trust .” My AI emphasized the importance of staying safe, erring on the side of caution and to always protect one’s online safety. My AI also reminded users to trust their instincts and that if something did not feel right, they felt uncomfortable, or pressured to share a photo, they did not have to. My AI suggested if someone did feel uncomfortable or pressured, they should speak with a trusted adult, block, or ignore the person who asked. For instance, one response from My AI stated: Hey Person Name! It’s really important to prioritize your safety and well-being online. Sending explicit content is not recommended, especially to someone you don’t know well or trust. It’s always better to err on the side of caution and protect your privacy. If you ever feel uncomfortable or unsure about a situation, it’s best to trust your instincts and not proceed. Your safety is the top priority! Across users ( n = 5) who asked Snapchat about a situation where they were asked for a nude photo, on average, responses contained 38 words, ranging from 15 to 66 words. Readability varied from 1st to 9th grade. This set of responses produced the shortest responses and lowest reading levels by the My AI across all the responses in this study. Emojis were only used in one response, and it was a purple heart at the end of the message (see Table 1 and Appendix ). Three of the five responses from My AI were personalized to include the user’s name. In all five responses, My AI recommended that the person stay safe or prioritize their safety online. After this, My AI was inconsistent in how it responded to the user. In 40% of responses, it apologized for the incident occurring. In 20% of responses, My AI suggested to proceed with caution or hesitancy, to ignore or not respond, or to use one’s own personal judgement in responding to this request. Only one response suggested contacting a trusted adult or Snapchat support for guidance. Unlike our other responses, within this question, My AI produced two nearly identical responses (See Appendix ). My AI said in both Response 1 and Response 5, “ No, it’s not safe to send a nude to someone you don’t know or trust, ” with the only difference being that at the end of Response 5 it added “Stay safe!” Comparison of Broad Questions to Specific Questions on Consent, Refusals, Sexual Assault, and Sexting We also prompted My AI with a set of questions that were broad and less specific to sexual activity to assess if My AI responded in a similar manner to questions that were specific and detailed. See Table 2 for My AI’s response to each question and Tables 3 – 5 for how the broader response matched with our additional responses from My AI. Consent. We asked My AI how to determine if someone “likes you” and how do you tell someone you “like them.” Similar to the specific consent questions, My AI focused on having open and honest communication with a partner and being clear in what you were interested in. A key difference between the two responses was that the broader “like” questions elicited more examples of nonverbal and verbal cues to communicate liking someone. For instance, My AI suggested if someone liked another person they may try to spend more time with them, give them compliments, or you may notice changes in their body language. Refusals. We asked My AI how to determine someone was “not interested in you” and how do you tell someone you are uninterested in them. For communication but not interpretation My AI iterated the importance of clear, respectful, and honest communication with partners. The broader questions elicited more examples from My AI on how to identify someone was uninterested in them, such as the person being short, not putting effort into the conversation, or not initiating conversation or plans with the person. Sexual Assault. For our sexual assault question, we informed My AI we had sex that did not feel okay and similar to our specific question on sexual assault, My AI responded with an apology first. My AI emphasized consent and being comfortable was important during a sexual encounter and highlighted the user could talk to someone about this experience, similar to our specific question on sexual assault. The key difference between the two responses was how it ended. With our broad question, My AI told the user they deserve to be in safe and consensual situations. Whereas with our specific sexual assault question, My AI stated the user was not alone. Sexting. Our final question for sexting did not reference sending a nude photo but instead, asked My AI what to do when they were asked for a general photo. Similar to the sexting question, My AI stated that one should only do what they feel comfortable with. However, the broader question led to My AI reminding the person that once a photo is out there, they cannot control it and to be cautious and trust your gut. My AI did not prompt the user to contact an adult or the support center to our broad question but did for the specific question. My AI, Llama, and Gemini Responses to Questions About Sexual Health Given the uniqueness of My AI we examined how My AI responses matched with responses from Llama and Gemini, two additional LLMs. We selected Llama, hosted by Meta, and Gemini, hosted by Google, as they are two more popular and frequently accessed LLMs. We did not examine the similarities and differences between My AI and ChatGPT as OpenAI is the source for both LLMs. See Appendix for the responses from Llama and Gemini to our questions. For sexual consent interpretation and communication, both Llama and Gemini referenced several areas that My AI did. Both discussed the value of open and clear honest communication, provided examples of verbal and nonverbal consent cues, and referenced respecting boundaries and listening to partners. For sexual refusals, both LLMs referenced the need for open and clear sexual refusal communication, that they should respect and listen to partners, and provided examples of verbal and nonverbal refusals. For sexual assault, Llama and Gemini’s responses had some similarities, such as including either an apology or affirmation to the person, provided support to the person, and recommended contacting a professional or friend, which included access to a hotline. Llama and Gemini were similar in response to our sexing question, both suggested someone needed to stay safe online and that they should never feel pressured or uncomfortable about sending a photo. Discussion The goal of our study was to evaluate how Snapchat’s My AI responded to inquiries regarding sexual consent and refusal communication (i.e., sexual communication), sexual assault, and sexting. We also sought to determine the qualitative consistency of My AI’s responses across different users. Additionally, we aimed to assess how My AI would respond to broader questions on these sexual health topics and how this related to more specific and direct questions. Finally, because My AI is a unique LLM included in a social media app and provides overall, brief responses, we examined how these responses matched with ones from two additional LLMs—Llama and Gemini. Our findings indicated that My AI offered concise and succinct responses to questions concerning sexual consent, sexual refusals, sexual assault, and sexting. In line with relevant theories (Use & Gratification or TAM), this might increase uptake of LLMs by young people. On occasion, My AI provided examples illustrating how to recognize and express willingness or unwillingness towards sexual activity. Notably, the language used in My AI’s responses conveyed support to people who may have experienced sexual assault or been solicited for sexually explicit content. Furthermore, we observed some consistency in responses across various users, indicating that young people may receive some degree of uniform messaging, which can be advantageous for learning purposes. When using broader language to ask questions about aspects of sexual consent, refusals, sexual assault, and sexting, My AI had similar responses to our detailed and specific questions on these topics. Finally, many of the core concepts mentioned by My AI were also mentioned by Llama and Gemini. In the subsequent sections, we review My AI’s responses, their alignment with current research, and their implications for the sexual health of young people. My AI’s Understanding of Sexual Consent and Sexual Refusals My AI’s responses to sexual consent and refusal interpretation and communication appeared to align with current research emphasizing clear communication, respect for boundaries, and mutual regard ( Hirsch & Khan, 2020 ; Marcantonio & Jozkowski, 2020 ; Muehlenhard et al., 2016 ). However, these responses often remained surface level, offering high-level summaries of sexual consent and refusals. The brevity and surface-level nature of responses might be influenced by the platform, Snapchat, for which My AI is designed to provide brief, user-like responses. Notably, when researchers queried ChatGPT about sexual consent, responses were longer and more detailed ( Marcantonio et al., 2023 ), suggesting a potential design influence. Our results with Gemini and Llama also confirm design differences across LLMs as both provided richer and more detailed responses than My AI did (see Appendix ). While responses being brief or surface level from My AI may not inherently be negative, it does reflect the broader trend in sexual consent education. The education young people are given on consent and refusals tends to be surface level; however, young people consistently express a desire for more detailed guidance on handling situations where partners fail to respect each other’s consent ( Muscari et al., 2023 ). Thus, greater efforts are needed to provide a more enriching educational experience around sexual communication for young people. Rarely did My AI offer examples of how to communicate sexual consent, although it did provide several examples of communicating refusals (e.g., “I appreciate your interest, but I am not interested in pursuing a sexual relationship”). However, some of these examples may not fully align with typical communication patterns of young people, potentially diminishing their effectiveness. Indeed, Gemini and Llama provided examples of how to consent and refuse, both nonverbally and verbally, which might align better with typical communication patterns. Therefore, there is room for improvement in My AI’s provision of information on sexual consent and refusals. My AI could incorporate brief examples reflecting real-life communication experiences and encourage users to elaborate on their interpretations through follow-up questions. Moreover, while My AI consistently emphasized the importance of consent and refusal communication, it could further elaborate on its significance, such as its role in fostering healthy relationships and positive outcomes for young people ( Javidi et al., 2022 ; Jozkowski, 2013 ; Marcantonio et al., 2020 ). Finally, our analysis of refusal responses from My AI revealed a noteworthy pattern. When asked how to communicate a refusal, My AI focused exclusively on clear, verbal communication, without mentioning non-verbal cues. However, when asked about interpreting refusals, non-verbal signals were highlighted in 80% of responses (4 out of 5 instances). This emphasis on recognizing non-verbal refusals aligns with current research on how young people typically refuse sexual advances (Kitzinger & Frith, 2000; O’Byrne et al., 2006; Marcantonio & Jozkowski, 2020 ). This can be seen as a positive outcome because, if My AI had suggested relying solely on a verbal “no” to interpret refusals, it would have misrepresented young people’s common refusal practices. By advising users to pay attention to non-verbal cues, My AI is promoting a more accurate understanding of how refusals are often communicated among peers. My AI’s Response to Disclosure of a Sexual Assault In our study, we prompted My AI with a scenario that could potentially constitute a sexual assault, and the AI responded with language suggesting sympathy or empathy towards the user. It used words which reflect expressing regret that the user had experienced such a situation and assured them that they were not alone, which could be comforting to someone feeling isolated and uncertain about how to proceed. These responses by My AI may be indicative of the algorithm it employs. This algorithm likely identifies the situation as a potential sexual assault, based on the wording of the question, and realizes the normative response, based on its language database, is to be compassionate or supportive. Additionally, My AI appropriately suggested that speaking to someone about the situation could be beneficial. Indeed, disclosing a sexual assault to a trusted individual can lead to positive outcomes for the survivor ( Gueta et al., 2020 ; Ullman et al., 2010 ). A similar pattern was noted with Gemini and Llama as well as they referenced reaching out for support if an assault had occurred. Looking ahead, My AI could enhance this response by offering young people direct access to hotlines or mental health resources if they disclose experiences of sexual assault—similar to the approach taken by ChatGPT ( Ayers, Zhu, et al., 2023 ), and what Llama and Gemini did when we asked them about sexual assault. My AI’s Responses to Sexting A second scenario we prompted My AI with was about sexting and someone asking for a sexually explicit image. My AI advised that sending nude or sexually explicit photos is not a good idea and that we should not send them to people we do not trust. This response is similar to responses from Claude and ChatGPT when they were asked about adolescents’ sexting behaviors ( Ricon, 2024 ). Within our responses, My AI did not directly tell a user to not send a photo—which may be a more effective form of communication on this topic. Stated differently, informing someone they cannot send images may fall on deaf ears when young people have had experiences where sending a nude image did not result in a negative consequence. Thus, responding in a way that communicates sending a nude photo may not the best idea, but that it’s up to the user, may provide the user with more autonomy in the decision-making process. Detailed Questions and Broad Questions on Sexual Health Topics As a component of our study, we assessed how My AI responded to questions related to consent, refusals, sexual assault, or sexting with less direct reference toward sex or sexual assault. For consent and refusals, broader questions using words such as “like” and “interest” prompted My AI to provide more examples of identifying whether someone liked or was uninterested in another person. This increased output may be due to the lack of inherent sexual connotation in these terms. Consequently, My AI offered more examples that could indicate romantic, sexual, or platonic interest. However, liking or interest is not equivalent to communicating sexual willingness or unwillingness. Therefore, My AI’s responses were broader regarding liking and interest and more concise and limited when discussing consent or refusals to sexual activity. Importantly, even when our broader questions did not mention sex, My AI encouraged users to ask and communicate with their partners rather than make assumptions about their feelings. This could suggest that safeguards emphasizing verbal communication are embedded within the algorithm. In our second set of broader questions, we asked about non-consensual sex and sending a photo, without explicitly referencing nudity. My AI’s responses to the broader question about sexual assault were similar to those for the direct question on sexual assault. This consistency may occur because the algorithm is designed to respond with supportive language whenever it detects language suggesting sexual assault. However, the responses to general photo requests versus nude photo requests differed significantly. When explicitly asked about sending a nude photo, the algorithm tended to respond with specific guidance, such as advising against it and suggesting speaking with an adult. Without the explicit mention of nudity, the responses were more generic and broader, perhaps because My AI cannot detect the nuance of the situation. Nonetheless, even with the broader photo exchange question, My AI advised users to only do what they feel comfortable with, emphasizing that they should not feel pressured to send a photo. Qualitative Consistency Across Responses from My AI In general, the responses from My AI exhibited some consistency across users and questions, which is a positive outcome. However, there were notable variations in certain responses that merit attention. One such difference was observed in the reading level across responses, which could pose challenges for interpreting My AI’s responses. While our research team consisted of people aged 18–22, adolescents aged 13–17 might struggle to comprehend some of the language used by My AI. For instance, understanding terms like “open communication” may be difficult for adolescents, especially considering the limited access to comprehensive sexual health education in the US ( Guttmacher Institute, 2020 ). Moving forward, identifying words or phrases surrounding sexual communication, violence, and sexting that are easily interpretable across different age groups may be necessary. This consideration holds significance for researchers, educators, and writers addressing topics related to sexual health and violence prevention. Since My AI draws responses from OpenAI, which utilizes available research and online information, clarity in describing various phenomena in research may be essential to assist LLMs in providing detailed and understandable responses. Our findings, along with others ( Ricon, 2024 ), may also suggest a need for an adolescent-centric LLM that is designed and tailored to understand adolescent development, safety, and needs. We observed variability in My AI’s use of punctuation, emojis, and personalization. Some responses included the user’s name, smiley faces, hearts, and exclamation marks. Many of these features were absent when researchers queried ChatGPT about consent ( Marcantonio et al., 2023 ). Additionally, My AI tended to provide shorter and more generalized responses compared with ChatGPT. These differences in responses between the two platforms, both housed within the same AI framework, may stem from their design targeting distinct audiences. For example, emoji use, personalization, and exclamation marks might be more reflective of communication styles on Snapchat than on ChatGPT. Notably, young people often perceive Snapchat as personalized ( Vaterlaus et al., 2016 ), suggesting that My AI may be programmed to respond in a manner that feels personal, through emoji use or exclamation marks. In line with Use and Gratification theory and TAM, this could increase uptake and use of LLMs by young people as they are conversational, easy to use, and somewhat tailored toward them. While some of these differences between LLMs need not be problematic, researchers, educators, and parents should be aware of them to address any potential discrepancies with adolescents and young adults. Moreover, recognizing how these platforms respond differently is necessary for determining how and when to integrate each into educational settings or broader contexts. ChatGPT may be better suited for classroom education, whereas Snapchat’s My AI may serve as a convenient at-home resource requiring further follow-up. Finally, as seen in Tables 3 – 5 , rarely does one response include all codes. Of importance, all responses regarding communication emphasized being clear, honest, or open with one another. This is a key aspect of sexual communication; however, there are a multitude of factors that are also important, such as how one does that or knows another is consenting or refusing. Similarly, this pattern occurred with responses to our questions on sexual assault and sexting. For example, all responses reflected language of sympathy or empathy for a user who disclosed sexual assault and recommended they contact an adult; however, there was variability in what additional information was provided. Within sexting, all responses mentioned staying safe, but only a few provided examples on how to stay safe online. Thus, hesitancy should be taken with My AI as the responses are somewhat consistent on a few core concepts, but not all concepts. Limitations Our study has several limitations worth noting. First, some team members use Snapchat regularly, while others are less frequent users. Snapchat’s My AI incorporates a user’s prior experience with My AI to tailor its responses, potentially affecting responses for those who use My AI more regularly. To mitigate some of this bias, we ensured each team member initiated a new chat with My AI, posed the questions in the same order, and then closed the chat. Second, our research team posing questions to Snapchat is relatively homogenous, consisting mostly of White, cisgender, heterosexual women aged 18–24. According to Snapchat’s Privacy and Safety policies, My AI only uses the user’s location when responding, without considering other demographic information such as age or gender. Location data is used to assist with advertising and providing local recommendations ( Snapchat, 2024 ). However, the homogeneity of our team could affect the interpretation of our findings. We attempted to mitigate this by comparing My AI’s responses with the broader available literature on these topics. While this approach helps address internal biases, the larger literature itself contains biases, as many research articles are published by researchers with similar identities to our team. This same body of research informs how ChatGPT, My AI, and other LLMs respond to questions. Therefore, our comparison of My AI to the existing literature is also limited and subjected to bias. Third, although we queried My AI about consent, refusals, sexual assault, and sexting, we did not follow up on its responses. In future studies, it would be beneficial to delve deeper into how My AI initially responds to these topics, examining whether it provides additional information, links to resources, or modifies its initial response when further questioned. Moreover, we posed a total of 12 questions to My AI (six specific and six broad questions). However, there exists a plethora of inquiries one could pose to My AI, and researchers must remain vigilant of the evolving nature of these models in response to varying questions. Notably, we observed differences in responses between our specific and broader questions. It’s important to acknowledge that this phenomenon is not unique to LLMs but also inherent to human interactions. Depending on the specificity and detail of a question posed to an individual, the response can vary significantly. Therefore, researchers and educators should contemplate how to teach young people to formulate “good” questions when interacting with LLMs, and other educators, ensuring they receive the desired answers. Fourth, as My AI is currently in beta testing with users. Its responses to these questions may evolve over time as this LLM continues to improve. Continuous efforts will be necessary to evaluate how these LLMs respond to inquiries about sexual health, particularly given their potential integration into various aspects of our lives. Finally, while Snapchat and other social media platforms offer benefits such as access to information and an artificial support network, they are also associated with negative consequences for young people, including technology-facilitated sexual harassment, bullying, and increased substance use ( Mandau, 2020 ; Salerno-Ferraro et al., 2022 ; Van Ouytsel et al., 2016 ; Yockey et al., 2019 ). Balancing these drawbacks with the benefits of LLM will require ongoing efforts to equip young people with the skills to enhance their online safety, navigate both inaccurate and accurate information, and safeguard their long-term health and well-being. Future Research Initiatives with LLMs Despite its limitations, our study offers insights for future research endeavors aiming to evaluate LLMs. Our findings, along with those from other studies utilizing various LLMs ( Marcantonio et al., 2023 ; Vowels, 2024 ; Vowels et al., 2024 ), suggest potential applications of LLMs in sexual health science. Moving forward, researchers may consider investigating how young people interact with these technologies; this would also provide additional evidence-based support for Use and Gratification theory and TAM with LLMs (Saif et al., 2023). Specifically, researchers could invite young adults to engage in conversations with ChatGPT or My AI about sexual health topics within a controlled lab environment. This approach would enable researchers to observe how the target demographic formulates questions for ChatGPT/My AI, how the LLM responds to their inquiries, and how the interaction between the two unfolds. We could also assess participant’s perceptions and emotional response to the comments from LLMs, which could provide further information on the motivation and value people place on the information provided by LLMs. We could then leverage those findings into interventions. Researchers could further investigate how people perceive LLMs by comparing responses from ChatGPT with those from sexual health educators on various sexual health topics and gauging young people’s preferences. This comparative analysis could shed light on the most effective methods for disseminating sexual health information to this demographic. Similar approaches have been utilized in medical contexts, revealing a preference for ChatGPT’s responses over those of medical professionals ( Ayers, Poliak, et al., 2023 ). Therefore, extending this inquiry to the field of sexual health could yield valuable insights into enhancing the delivery of sexual health information. This is not to suggest that we replace sexual health educators with LLMs. Indeed, people are wary of ChatGPT, in a medical context, and would prefer to know a medical professional was involved in the responses generated and suggested from ChatGPT ( Reed, 2023 , 2024 ). Further, health decisions should be made within the context and guidance of trained professionals. Thus, instead of viewing ChatGPT and other LLMs as ways of replacing humans, we could instead learn what about the delivery or information people prefer and dislike and how can we replicate that experience in a conversation, classroom, or in an intervention. Collectively, LLMs should be viewed as a tool that complements health services and education. Health Promotion Initiatives with LLMs Our findings also carry implications for health promotion, particularly regarding the integration of digital technologies. Currently, there is a scarcity of smartphone apps directly addressing sexual and reproductive health, ( Brayboy et al., 2017 ; West et al., 2012 ) and those that promote health are seldom downloaded ( Eleuteri et al., 2017 , 2018 ). To address this gap, educators and researchers should consider leveraging popular smartphone apps already widely adopted by young people. Snapchat, for instance, is one such app that has high usage rates among young people. By integrating sexual health information into platforms such as Snapchat, educators can effectively reach their target audience where they are already engaged daily. Consequently, educators may explore the incorporation of LLMs, such as My AI or ChatGPT, as a tool for sexual health education within these widely used apps. This approach could prove particularly valuable given that adolescents often express difficulties in finding clear and understandable sexual health information online and report feeling overwhelmed by the available resources ( Park & Kwon, 2018 ). LLMs have the potential to deliver information in a succinct, concise, and digestible manner, which may resonate more effectively with young people and address their information needs ( Davis, 1989 ; Riggrio, 2000). In addition to using apps for sexual health promotion and information access, educating young people on effective app usage is critical. In an increasingly digital world, where various types of LLMs are readily available, young people must learn how to harness these tools for their health, including sexual health. Incorporating training on LLMs usage into health education, specifically sexual health education, can empower young people to utilize LLMs effectively. Educators can also teach young people how to formulate insightful questions when interacting with LLMs, facilitating their ability to find relevant information. Furthermore, they can instruct them on how to evaluate the accuracy and legitimacy of information provided by these LLMs and how to weigh this information based on their individual needs and circumstances. Conclusion In conclusion, our study examined Snapchat’s My AI responses to inquiries regarding sexual consent, refusals, sexual assault, and sexting. Overall, we found that My AI provided some qualitatively consistent responses that aligned with existing research on these topics. However, the responses tended to be succinct and somewhat generalized. While My AI serves as a widely-used platform among young people and has the potential to enhance understanding of sexual health topics, our findings suggest that it may benefit from supplementation with human educators or teachers to offer more nuanced and detailed information. By pairing My AI with knowledgeable facilitators, young people can receive tailored guidance and clarification, thereby maximizing the platform’s effectiveness as a learning tool for sexual health education. Supplementary Material Online Appendix NIHMS2023562-supplement-Online_Appendix.docx (25.6KB, docx) Funding: Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) under Award Number K01AA028844 (Leone), L30AA028649 (Leone), and L30AA031129 (Marcantonio). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. We also want to thank the Consent, Alcohol, and Sexual Assault Research Lab (CASA) for their help in conducting this project and coding the data. References Affirmative Consent and Respect. (2017). Affirmative consent campus policy report. http://affirmativeconsent.com/consentpolicy/ Ayers JW, Poliak A, Dredze M, Leas EC, Zhu Z, Kelley JB, Faix DJ, Goodman AM, Longhurst CA, Hogarth M, & Smith DM (2023). Comparing physician and artificial intelligence chatbot responses to patient questions posted to a public social media forum. JAMA Internal Medicine, 183(6), 589. 10.1001/jamainternmed.2023.1838 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Ayers JW, Zhu Z, Poliak A, Leas EC, Dredze M, Hogarth M, & Smith DM (2023). Evaluating artificial intelligence responses to public health questions. JAMA Network Open, 6(6), e2317517. 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2023.17517 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Barak A, & Fisher WA (2001). Toward an internet-driven, theoretically-based, innovative approach to sex education. Journal of Sex Research, 38(4), 324–332. 10.1080/00224490109552103 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Brayboy LM, Sepolen A, Mezoian T, Schultz L, Landgren-Mills BS, Spencer N, Wheeler C, & Clark MA (2017). Girl Talk: A smartphone application to teach sexual health education to adolescent girls. Journal of Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology, 30(1), 23–28. 10.1016/j.jpag.2016.06.011 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Cooper A (1998). Sexuality and the internet: Surfing into the new millennium. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 1(2), 187–193. 10.1089/cpb.1998.1.187 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Davis FD (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of information technology. MIS Quarterly, 13(3), 319. 10.2307/249008 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] DeGue S, Valle LA, Holt MK, Massetti GM, Matjasko JL, & Tharp AT (2014). A systematic review of primary prevention strategies for sexual violence perpetration. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 19(4), 346–362. 10.1016/j.avb.2014.05.004 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Dolev-Cohen M, & Ricon T (2020). Demystifying sexting: Adolescent sexting and its associations with parenting styles and sense of parental social control in Israel. Cyberpsychology: Journal of Psychosocial Research on Cyberspace, 14(1), 10.5817/CP2020-1-6 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Doring N (2014). Consensual sexting among adolescents: Risk prevention through abstinence education or safer sexting? Cyberpsychology: Journal of Psychosocial Research on Cyberspace, 8(1). 10.5817/CP2014-1-9. [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Eleuteri S, Rossi R, Tripodi F, Fabrizi A, & Simonelli C (2018). Sexual health in your hands: How the smartphone apps can improve your sexual wellbeing? Sexologies, 27(3), e57–e60. 10.1016/j.sexol.2018.04.004 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Eleuteri S, Saladino V, & Verrastro V (2017). Identity, relationships, sexuality, and risky behaviors of adolescents in the context of social media. Sexual and Relationship Therapy, 32(3–4), 354–365. 10.1080/14681994.2017.1397953 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Goldfarb ES, & Lieberman LD (2021). Three Decades of Research: The Case for Comprehensive Sex Education. Journal of Adolescent Health, 68(1), 13–27. 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2020.07.036 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Gueta K, Eytan S, & Yakimov P (2020). Between healing and revictimization: The experience of public self-disclosure of sexual assault and its perceived effect on recovery. Psychology of Violence, 10(6), 626–637. 10.1037/vio0000309 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Guttmacher Institute. (2020). State and law policies: Sex and HIV Education. Sex and HIV Education [ Google Scholar ] Hall WJ, Jones BLH, Witkemper KD, Collins TL, & Rodgers GK (2019). State Policy on School-based Sex Education: A Content Analysis Focused on Sexual Behaviors, Relationships, and Identities. American Journal of Health Behavior, 43(3), 506–519. 10.5993/AJHB.43.3.6 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Hassani H, & Silva ES (2023). The role of ChatGPT in data science: How AI-assisted conversational interfaces are revolutionizing the field. Big Data and Cognitive Computing, 7(2), 62. 10.3390/bdcc7020062 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Heaven WD (2023). ChatGPT is everywhere. Here’s where it came from. MIT Technology Review. Accessed on July 13, 2024. https://www.technologyreview.com/2023/02/08/1068068/chatgpt-is-everywhere-heres-where-it-came-from/ [ Google Scholar ] Hickman S, & Muehlenhard CL (1999). “By the semi-mystical appearance of a condom”: How young women and men communicate sexual consent in heterosexual situations. Journal of Sex Research, 36(3), 258–272. [ Google Scholar ] Hirsch JS, & Khan SR (2020). Sexual citizens: A landmark study of sex, power, and assault on campus (First Edition). W. W. Norton & Company. [ Google Scholar ] Hirsch JS, Khan SR, Wamboldt A, & Mellins CA (2019). Social dimensions of sexual consent among cisgender heterosexual college students: Insights from ethnographic research. Journal of Adolescent Health, 64(1), 26–35. 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2018.06.011 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Hsieh H-F, & Shannon SE (2005). Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qualitative Health Research, 15(9), 1277–1288. 10.1177/1049732305276687 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Hutchinson A (2023, June 15). Snapchat shares new stats on ‘My AI’ usage, outlines how its utilizing chat data [Infographic]. Social Media Today, 1–9. [ Google Scholar ] Javidi H, Widman L, Evans-Paulson R, & Lipsey N (2022). Internal consent, affirmative external consent, and sexual satisfaction among young adults. The Journal of Sex Research, 1–11. 10.1080/00224499.2022.2048628 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Jozkowski KN (2013). The influence of consent on college students’ perceptions of the quality of sexual intercourse at last event. International Journal of Sexual Health, 25(4), 260–272. 10.1080/19317611.2013.799626 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Kantor LM, Lindberg LD, Tashkandi Y, Hirsch JS, & Santelli JS (2021). Sex education: Broadening the definition of relevant outcomes. Journal of Adolescent Health, 68(1), 7–8. 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2020.09.031 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Kitzinger C, & Frith H (1999). Just say no? The use of conversation anaylsis in developing a feminist perspective on sexual refusals. Discourse & Soceity, 10, 293–316. 10.1177/0957926599010003002 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Lindberg LD, & Kantor LM (2022). Adolescents’ receipt of sex education in a nationally representative sample, 2011–2019. Journal of Adolescent Health, 70(2), 290–297. 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2021.08.027 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Mandau MBH (2020). ‘Directly in your face’: A qualitative study on the sending and receiving of unsolicited ‘dick pics’ among young adults. Sexuality & Culture, 24(1), 72–93. 10.1007/s12119-019-09626-2 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Marcantonio TL, & Jozkowski KN (2020). Assessing how gender, relationship status, and item working influence cues used by collge students to decline different sexual behaviors. Journal of Sex Research, 57(2), 260–272. 10.1080/00224499.2019.1659218 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Marcantonio TL, & Jozkowski KN (2021). College students’ definition of non-consent and sexual refusals in the age of affirmative consent initiatives. Sex Education, 1–17. 10.1080/14681811.2021.2012446 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Marcantonio TL, Jozkowski KN, & Lo W-J (2018). Beyond “just saying no”: A preliminary evaluation of strategies college students use to refuse sexual activity. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 47(2), 341–351. 10.1007/s10508-017-1130-2 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Marcantonio TL, Lestingi A, Meadows M, Thrash A, & DiLoreto-Hill J (2024). What do states recommend we teach adolescents about sexual consent? A content analysis of K-12 health education standards in the US. The Journal of Sex Research, 1–10. 10.1080/00224499.2024.2344682 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Marcantonio TL, Nielsen KE, Haikalis M, Leone RM, Woerner J, Neilson EC, & Schipani-McLaughlin AM (2023). Hey ChatGPT, let’s talk about sexual consent. The Journal of Sex Research, 1–12. 10.1080/00224499.2023.2254772 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Marcantonio TL, Valdez D, & Jozkowski KN (2022). An assessment of the cues college students interpret from a sexual partner to determine they are refusing. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 37(13–14), NP12352–NP12374. 10.1177/0886260521997930 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Marcantonio TL, Weese J, & Willis M (2022). Rates of forced sexual experiences among high school students from 2001 to 2019. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 37(21–22), NP21045–NP21069. 10.1177/08862605211055155 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Marcantonio TL, Willis M, & Jozkowski KN (2020). Women’s sexual consent: Potential implications for sexual satisfaction. Current Sexual Health Reports, 12(3), 120–126. 10.1007/s11930-020-00267-3 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Markov T, Zhang C, Agarwal S, Eloundou T, Lee T, Adler S, Jiang A, & Weng L (2022a). A holistic approach to undesired content detection in the real world. 10.48550/ARXIV.2208.03274 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Markov T, Zhang C, Agarwal S, Eloundou T, Lee T, Adler S, Jiang A, & Weng L (2022b, August 10). New and improved content moderation tooling. OpenAI. https://openai.com/blog/new-and-improved-content-moderation-tooling [ Google Scholar ] Mills R, Mangone ER, Lesh N, Mohan D, & Baraitser P (2023). Chatbots to improve sexual and reproductive health:Realist synthesis. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 25, e46761. 10.2196/46761 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Muehlenhard C, Humphreys T, Jozkowski KN, & Peterson ZD (2016). The complexities of sexual consent among college students: A conceptual and empirical review. Journal of Sex Research, 53, 457–487. 10.1080/00224499.2016.1146651 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Muehlenhard C, Peterson ZD, Humphreys TP, & Jozkowski KN (2017). Evaluating the one-in five statistic: Women’s risk of sexual assault while in college. Journal of Sex Research, 54, 549–576. 10.1080/00224499.2017.1295014 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Mugo D, Njagi K, Chemwei B, & Motanya J (2017). The technology acceptance model (TAM) and its application to the utilization of mobile learning technologies. British Journal of Mathematics & Computer Science, 20(4), 1–8. 10.9734/BJMCS/2017/29015 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Muscari E, Littleton H, & Cunnane L (2023). Emerging adults’ perceptions of school-based sex education on consent, sexual assault, and intimate partner violence. Sex Education, 23(6), 692–708. 10.1080/14681811.2022.2114074 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Nadarzynski T, Lunt A, Knights N, Bayley J, & Llewellyn C (2023). “But can chatbots understand sex?” Attitudes towards artificial intelligence chatbots amongst sexual and reproductive health professionals: An exploratory mixed-methods study. International Journal of STD & AIDS, 34(11), 809–816. 10.1177/09564624231180777 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] OpenAI. (2023, March 15). Introducing GPT-4, OpenAI’s most advanced system. https://openai.com [ Google Scholar ] Park E, & Kwon M (2018). Health-related internet use by children and adolescents: Systematic review. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 20(4), e120. 10.2196/jmir.7731 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Peterson ZD, & Muehlenhard CL (2007). Conceptualizing the “wantedness” of women’s consensual and nonconsensual sexual experiences: Implications for how women label their experiences with rape. Journal of Sex Research, 44(1), 72–88. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Planned Parenthood. (2023). Sexual conset. Planned Parenthood. https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/relationships/sexual-consent [ Google Scholar ] Planned Parenthood. (2024). All about sexting. https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/teens/bullying-safety-privacy/all-about-sexting#:~:text=Is%20it%20legal%3F,naked%20picture%20of%20a%20minor . Reed T (2023, December 13). Patients worry about how doctors may be using AI: survey. Axios. https://www.axios.com/2023/12/13/survey-patients-wary-of-generative-ai [ Google Scholar ] Reed T (2024, May 21). Newest version of ChatGPT could accelerate chatbot care. Axios. https://www.axios.com/2024/05/21/chatgpt-health-care-doctors?utm_source=newsletter&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=newsletter_axiosvitals&stream=top [ Google Scholar ] Ricon T (2024). How chatbots perceive sexting by adolescents. Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans, 2(1). Advanced online print. 10.1016/j.chbah.2024.100068 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Ruby D (2023, February 8). ChatGPT statistics for 2023: Comprehensive facts and data. DemandSage. https://www.demandsage.com/chatgpt-statistics/ [ Google Scholar ] Ruggiero TE (2000). Uses and gratifications theory in the 21st Century. Mass Communication and Society, 3(1), 3–37. 10.1207/S15327825MCS0301_02 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Salerno-Ferraro AC, Erentzen C, & Schuller RA (2022). Young women’s experiences with technology-facilitated sexual violence from male strangers. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 37(19–20), NP17860–NP17885. 10.1177/08862605211030018 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Saif N, Khan SU, Shaheen I, ALotaibi FA, Alnfiai MM, & Arif M (2024). Chat-GPT; validating Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) in education sector via ubiquitous learning mechanism. Computers in Human Behavior, 154, 108097. 10.1016/j.chb.2023.108097 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Schneider M, & Hirsch JS (2020). Comprehensive sexuality education as a primary prevention strategy for sexual violence perpetration. Trauma, Violence, & Abuse, 21(3), 439–455. 10.1177/1524838018772855 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Skjuve M, Brandtzaeg PB, & Følstad A (2024). Why do people use ChatGPT? Exploring user motivations for generative conversational AI. First Monday. 10.5210/fm.v29i1.13541 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Snapchat. (2023a). Early insights on My Ai (pp. 1–22). https://newsroom.snap.com/early-insights-on-my-ai Snapchat. (2023b). Snap Inc. Investor Presentation. https://investor.snap.com/financials/Annual-Report/default.aspx Snapchat. (2024). Privacy and Safety Hub. https://values.snap.com/privacy/privacy-by-product Snapchat Support. (2023a). Staying safe with My AI. Snapchat Support. https://help.snapchat.com/hc/en-us/articles/13889139811860-Staying-Safe-with-My-AI [ Google Scholar ] Snapchat Support. (2023b). What is My AI on Snapchat and how do I use it? Snapchat Support. https://help.snapchat.com/hc/en-us/articles/13266788358932-What-is-My-AI-on-Snapchat-and-how-do-I-use-it#:~:text=What%20data%20is%20shared%20with,requests%2C%20including%20nearby%20place%20recommendations . [ Google Scholar ] Throne E (2024). ChatGPT hits 100M weekly users. LinkedIn. https://www.linkedin.com/news/story/chatgpt-hits-100m-weekly-users-5808204/ [ Google Scholar ] UC San Diego Center for Gender Equity and Health (2019). Measuring #MeToo: A national study on sexual harassment and assault. https://gehweb.ucsd.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/2019-metoo-national-sexual-harassment-and-assault-report.pdf Ullman SE, Foynes MM, & Tang SSS (2010). Benefits and barriers to disclosing sexual trauma: A contextual approach. Journal of Trauma & Dissociation, 11(2), 127–133. 10.1080/15299730903502904 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] UNESCO, United Nations Children’s Fund, Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, United Nations Population Fund, World Health Organization, & United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women. (2021). The journey towards comprehensive sexuality education: Global status report. UNESCO. 10.54675/NFEK1277 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Utz S, Muscanell N, & Khalid C (2015). Snapchat elicits more jealousy than facebook: A comparison of Snapchat and Facebook Use. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 18(3), 141–146. 10.1089/cyber.2014.0479 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Van Ouytsel J, Van Gool E, Walrave M, Ponnet K, & Peeters E (2016). Sexting: Adolescents’ perceptions of the applications used for, motives for, and consequences of sexting. Journal of Youth Studies, 1–25. 10.1080/13676261.2016.1241865 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Vaterlaus JM, Barnett K, Roche C, & Young JA (2016). “Snapchat is more personal”: An exploratory study on Snapchat behaviors and young adult interpersonal relationships. Computers in Human Behavior, 62, 594–601. 10.1016/j.chb.2016.04.029 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Verma P (2023, March 14). What to know about OpenAI, the company behind ChatGPT. The Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2023/02/06/what-is-openai-chatgpt/ [ Google Scholar ] Vowels LM (2024). Are chatbots the new relationship experts? Insights from three studies. Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans, 2(2), 100077. 10.1016/j.chbah.2024.100077 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Vowels LM, Francois-Walcott R, & Darwiche J (2024). AI in relationship counselling: Evaluating ChatGPT’s therapeutic capabilities in providing relationship advice. Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans. 2(2), 100078 10.1016/j.chbah.2024.100078 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] West JH, Hall PC, Hanson CL, Barnes MD, Giraud-Carrier C, & Barrett J (2012). There’s an app for that: Content analysis of paid health and fitness apps. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 14(3), e72. 10.2196/jmir.1977 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Willis M, & Jozkowski KN (2019). Sexual precedent’s effect on sexual consent communication. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 48(6), 1723–1734. 10.1007/s10508-018-1348-7 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Willis M, Jozkowski KN, & Read J (2019). Sexual consent in K–12 sex education: An analysis of current health education standards in the United States. Sex Education, 19(2), 226–236. 10.1080/14681811.2018.1510769 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Yang C, Brown BB, & Braun MT (2014). From Facebook to cell calls: Layers of electronic intimacy in college students’ interpersonal relationships. New Media & Society, 16(1), 5–23. 10.1177/1461444812472486 [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Yockey RA, King KA, Vidourek R, Burbage M, & Merianos A (2019). The depiction of sexuality among university students on Snapchat. Sexuality & Culture, 23(1), 132–141. 10.1007/s12119-018-9546-y [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] Yosifova A (2022). ChatGPT: How to understand and compete with the AI bot. 365 Data Science. https://365datascience.com/trending/chatgpt-how-to-understand-and-compete-with-the-ai-bot/ [ Google Scholar ] Associated Data This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article. Supplementary Materials Online Appendix NIHMS2023562-supplement-Online_Appendix.docx (25.6KB, docx) ACTIONS View on publisher site PDF (176.6 KB) Cite Collections Permalink PERMALINK Copy RESOURCES Similar articles Cited by other articles Links to NCBI Databases Cite Copy Download .nbib .nbib Format: AMA APA MLA NLM Add to Collections Create a new collection Add to an existing collection Name your collection * Choose a collection Unable to load your collection due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Back to Top