URL: https://www.infoworld.com/article/3587591/pyston-returns-from-the-dead-to-speed-python.html

Pyston returns from the dead to speed Python | InfoWorld Search Menu Topics Close Analytics Artificial Intelligence Careers Cloud Computing Data Management Databases Development Tools Devops Emerging Technology Enterprise Buyer’s Guides Generative AI IT Leadership Java JavaScript Microsoft .NET Open Source Programming Languages Python Security Software Development Technology Industry Back Close by Serdar Yegulalp Senior Writer Pyston returns from the dead to speed Python news Oct 29, 2020 2 mins Picking up where Dropbox left off, a new development team has released a fresh version of the just-in-time optimizing Python runtime, compatible with Python 3.8 Credit: Shout! Factory Development of Pyston , a variant of the Python runtime that uses just-in-time compilation to speed up the execution of Python programs, is back on again after a long period of limbo. Picking up where Dropbox left off, a new development team has released Pyston 2.0 . Pyston provides what is ultimately intended to be a drop-in replacement for the standard Python runtime, CPython. It’s compatible with Python 3.8, so programs that runs with that version of Python should run as-is on Pyston. Pyston performs code generation using just-in-time compilation, or JITting, to yield many of its speedups. Pure-Python programs show the largest improvements, while programs that use C/C++ modules for faster execution, like PyTorch, show less or none. One of the goals of the project was to remain as close as possible to the original implementation of CPython, since many third-party projects make assumptions about CPython behavior. Thus Pyston 2.0 began with the existing CPython codebase and added features from Pyston 1.0 that worked well, such as caching attributes and JITting. Pyston’s JIT no longer uses LLVM, but DynASM to emit assembly directly. JITting is the same technique used by another project, PyPy , to deliver major speedups to Python applications — in some cases, seven times what CPython can deliver. However, Pyston’s makers claim their approach has several advantages over PyPy including better compatibility with CPython’s C API and lower memory consumption for common workloads (e.g., Flask and DjangoCMS). Created at Dropbox, Pyston ceased development in 2017 when the Dropbox withdrew support. Now the project is continuing under the care of some of its original developers, albeit independently. “In early 2020,” the official Pyston blog states, “enough pieces were in place for us to start a company and work on Pyston full-time.” However, unlike the original Pyston incarnation, the new version is closed-source for the time being, as its new stewards determine their business model. The source code available on the project’s GitHub appears to be from its earlier incarnation, not the most recent version. Prebuilt binaries of Pyston are available for Ubuntu 18.04 and Ubuntu 20.04 x86_64. The development team is willing to build other editions based on user feedback. Python Programming Languages Software Development Related content feature The best JavaScript certifications for getting hired By Bob Violino Apr 27, 2026 8 mins news Microsoft taps Anthropic’s Mythos to strengthen secure software development By Prasanth Aby Thomas Apr 23, 2026 3 mins opinion How I doubled my GPU efficiency without buying a single new card By Gokul Chandra Apr 23, 2026 7 mins opinion How open source ideals must expand for AI By Scott McCarty Apr 23, 2026 8 mins by Serdar Yegulalp Senior Writer Follow Serdar Yegulalp on X Serdar Yegulalp is a senior writer at InfoWorld . A veteran technology journalist, Serdar has been writing about computers, operating systems, databases, programming, and other information technology topics for 30 years. Before joining InfoWorld in 2013, Serdar wrote for Windows Magazine, InformationWeek, Byte, and a slew of other publications. At InfoWorld, Serdar has covered software development, devops, containerization, machine learning, and artificial intelligence, winning several B2B journalism awards including a 2024 Neal Award and a 2025 Azbee Award for best instructional content and best how-to article, respectively. He currently focuses on software development tools and technologies and major programming languages including Python, Rust, Go, Zig, and Wasm. Tune into his weekly Dev with Serdar videos for programming tips and techniques and close looks at programming libraries and tools. More from this author reviews Google’s Gemma 4 shines on local systems – both big and small Apr 22, 2026 8 mins feature Exciting Python features are on the way Apr 17, 2026 2 mins feature Tap into the AI APIs of Google Chrome and Microsoft Edge Apr 15, 2026 9 mins feature Get started with Python’s new frozendict type Apr 8, 2026 5 mins feature PEP 816: How Python is getting serious about Wasm Apr 1, 2026 7 mins analysis On the pleasures and dangers of open source Python Mar 27, 2026 3 mins how-to Speed boost your Python programs with new lazy imports Mar 25, 2026 6 mins feature I ran Qwen3.5 locally instead of Claude Code. Here’s what happened. Mar 18, 2026 9 mins Show me more Popular Articles Videos opinion Google begins putting the guardrails on agentic AI By Matt Asay Apr 27, 2026 7 mins Data and Information Security Generative AI Google Cloud Platform news Meta's compute grab continues with agreement to deploy tens of millions of AWS Graviton cores By Taryn Plumb Apr 24, 2026 6 mins Amazon Web Services Artificial Intelligence IaaS news Germany's sovereign AI hope changes hands By Maxwell Cooter Apr 24, 2026 2 mins Artificial Intelligence Generative AI video Jujutsu: The rising alternative to Git Apr 21, 2026 5 mins Python video How to run Chrome and Edge's built-in AI Apr 14, 2026 6 mins Python video Python's new frozendict type Apr 2, 2026 4 mins Python