URL: https://www.wsj.com/business/energy-oil/ai-data-centers-energy-savings-d602296e

Energy-Guzzling AI Is Also the Future of Energy Savings - WSJ Skip to Main Content The Wall Street Journal English Edition Edition Use Alt + Down Arrow to expand. English 中文 (Chinese) 日本語 (Japanese) Print Edition Video Audio Latest Headlines Puzzles More More Other Products from WSJ WSJ | Buy Side The Journal Collection WSJ Shop WSJ Wine Advertisement This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. Distribution and use of this material are governed by our Subscriber Agreement and by copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies, please contact Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or visit www.djreprints.com. https://www.wsj.com/business/energy-oil/ai-data-centers-energy-savings-d602296e Energy-Guzzling AI Is Also the Future of Energy Savings Data centers need more power because of artificial intelligence—but other buildings can use the technology to conserve By Carol Ryan Listen (2 min) Chiara Vercesi Artificial intelligence data centers are becoming so ravenous for power that they threaten to max out electricity grids. Yet one of the technology’s least glamorous uses—finding ways to pinch pennies on energy bills in homes and commercial buildings—could ease the crunch. Industry leaders think that AI has the potential to change everything from how cancer is diagnosed to the way advertising campaigns are created . But training AI models on huge data sets sucks up a lot of power. Even a simple ChatGPT request uses nearly 10 times more electricity than a regular Google search, according to the International Energy Agency. This week, the chief executive of chip-design company Arm warned that, unless energy savings are found, AI data centers could consume up to 25% of America’s power by 2030, compared with 4% today. Copyright © 2026 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8 Videos Most Popular News Most Popular OPINION Recommended Videos Advertisement