URL: https://www.voanews.com/a/un-announces-advisory-body-on-artificial-intelligence-/7328732.html

UN Announces Advisory Body on Artificial Intelligence Accessibility links Skip to main content Skip to main Navigation Skip to Search Next Close Previous Next This image contains sensitive content which some people may find offensive or disturbing. Click to reveal Print Options: Images Multimedia Embedded Content Comments Cancel Print Link has been copied to clipboard Follow Us Languages Search Search Previous Next Breaking News Technology UN Announces Advisory Body on Artificial Intelligence By VOA News October 26, 2023 6:03 PM UN Announces Advisory Body on Artificial Intelligence Share Share Copy link Facebook Twitter Email Share Share Copy link Facebook Twitter Email Print FILE - A ChatGPT prompt is shown on a device in Brooklyn, N.Y., Jan. 5, 2023. The popular online chatbot powered by artificial intelligence is also proving to be adept at creating disinformation and propaganda. The United Nations has begun an effort to help the world manage the risks and benefits of artificial intelligence. U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres on Thursday launched a 39-member advisory body of tech company executives, government officials and academics from countries spanning six continents. The panel aims to issue preliminary recommendations on AI governance by the end of the year and finalize them before the U.N. Summit of the Future next September. “The transformative potential of AI for good is difficult even to grasp,” Guterres said. He pointed to possible uses including predicting crises, improving public health and education, and tackling the climate crisis. However, he cautioned, “it is already clear that the malicious use of AI could undermine trust in institutions, weaken social cohesion and threaten democracy itself.” Widespread concern about the risks associated with AI has grown since tech company OpenAI launched ChatGPT last year. Its ease of use has raised concern that the tool could replace writing tasks that previously only humans could perform. With many calling for regulation of AI, researchers and lawmakers have stressed the need for global cooperation on the matter. The U.N.’s new body on AI will hold its first meeting Friday. Some information for this report came from Reuters. UN Announces Advisory Body on Artificial Intelligence Share Share Copy link Facebook Twitter Email Share Share Copy link Facebook Twitter Email Print VOA News The Voice of America provides news and information in more than 40 languages to an estimated weekly audience of over 326 million people. Stories with the VOA News byline are the work of multiple VOA journalists and may contain information from wire service reports. This item is part of Science & Health Technology Related LogOn: 'Resurrecting' People Through AI — Comforting or Creepy? China Falsely Denies Disinformation Campaign Targeting Canada’s Prime Minister Governments, Firms Should Spend More on AI Safety, Top Researchers Say Philippines Orders Military to Stop Using AI Apps Due to Security Risks XS SM MD LG