URL: https://www.tomshardware.com/tech-industry/artificial-intelligence/several-ai-companies-said-to-be-ignoring-robots-dot-txt-exclusion-scraping-content-without-permission-report

Several AI companies said to be ignoring robots dot txt exclusion, scraping content without permission: report | Tom's Hardware Skip to main content Tom's Hardware Subscription Why subscribe? Get deeper insights with deeper News Analysis posts Read exclusive subscriber-only features and interviews Unlock access to Bench, our custom benchmark test visualizer, and compare products From $7 /mth Subscribe now Don't miss these Artificial Intelligence Nvidia says AI cuts 10-month, eight-engineer GPU design task to overnight job Cloud Storage Backblaze silently redefines 'unlimited' backups and users discover it's not backing up Dropbox and OneDrive Big Tech News outlets are blocking Wayback Machine from archiving their pages Linux Linux lays down the law on AI-generated code, says yes to Copilot, no to AI slop, and humans take the fall for mistakes Artificial Intelligence Anthropic's Claude Mythos isn't a sentient super-hacker, it's a sales pitch — claims of 'thousands' of severe zero-days rely on just 198 manual reviews Tech Industry Anonymous perps behind 86 million files scraped from Spotify hit with $322 million court judgement Artificial Intelligence Analytics group signals possible delays at 40% of AI data center construction sites Artificial Intelligence Microsoft says Copilot is for entertainment purposes only, not serious use Tech Industry Tech industry lays off nearly 80,000 employees in the first quarter of 2026 Artificial Intelligence Anthropic's latest AI model identifies 'thousands of zero-day vulnerabilities' in 'every major operating system and every major web browser' Tech Industry Local political revolts threaten to derail US data center projects Artificial Intelligence Claude Code deletes developers' production setup, including its database and snapshots Artificial Intelligence Amazon calls engineers to address issues caused by use of AI tools, report claims Artificial Intelligence The largest programming community on Reddit has just banned all content related to LLMs Artificial Intelligence AI tool OpenClaw wipes the inbox of Meta's AI Alignment director despite repeated commands to stop Several AI companies said to be ignoring robots dot txt exclusion, scraping content without permission: report News By Anton Shilov published 21 June 2024 AI does not care about licensing When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works . (Image credit: Getty Images) Copy link Facebook X Whatsapp Reddit Pinterest Flipboard Email Share this article 15 Join the conversation Follow us Add us as a preferred source on Google Newsletter Tom's Hardware Stay On the Cutting Edge: Get the Tom's Hardware Newsletter Get Tom's Hardware's best news and in-depth reviews, straight to your inbox. Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors By submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over. You are now subscribed Your newsletter sign-up was successful An account already exists for this email address, please log in. Subscribe to our newsletter Several AI companies are circumventing the Robots Exclusion Protocol (robots.txt) to scrape content from websites without permission, according to TollBit, a content licensing startup, reports Reuters . This issue has led to disputes between AI firms and publishers, with Forbes accusing Perplexity of plagiarizing its content. TollBit's letter to publishers, obtained by Reuters, reveals that many AI agents are ignoring the robots.txt standard, which is used to block parts of a site from being crawled. The company’s analytics indicate a pattern of widespread non-compliance, as various AIs use data for training without authorization. AI search startup Perplexity, in particular, has been accused by Forbes of using its investigative stories in AI-generated summaries without proper attribution or permission. Perplexity did not comment on these allegations. The robots.txt protocol, created in the mid-1990s, was intended to prevent web crawlers from overloading websites. Although it has no legal enforcement, it has traditionally been widely respected — until now, it seems. Publishers are trying to use this protocol to block unauthorized content usage by AI systems, which scrape content to train algorithms and generate summaries. "What this means in practical terms is that AI agents from multiple sources (not just one company) are opting to bypass the robots.txt protocol to retrieve content from sites," TollBit wrote, according to Reuters. "The more publisher logs we ingest, the more this pattern emerges." Some publishers, like the New York Times, have taken legal action against AI companies for copyright infringement. Others have opted to negotiate licensing deals. This ongoing debate highlights the conflicting views on the value and legality of using content to train generative AI, as many AI developers argue that accessing content without charge does not violate any laws — unless, of course, it's paid content. The issue has gained prominence as AI-generated news summaries become more common. Google 's AI product, which creates summaries in response to search queries, has worsened publisher concerns. To prevent their content from being used by Google’s AI, publishers have been blocking it using robots.txt, but this removes their content from search results and impacts their online visibility. Meanwhile, if AIs ignore robots.txt, then what's the point of content owners using it to no effect, and losing online visibility? TollBit also has a horse in this AI and editorial content race, positioning itself as an intermediary between AI companies and publishers that helps to establish licensing agreements for content usage. The startup tracks AI traffic to publisher websites and provides analytics to negotiate fees for different types of content, including premium content. TollBit claims to have 50 websites using its services as of May, but did not disclose their names. Stay On the Cutting Edge: Get the Tom's Hardware Newsletter Get Tom's Hardware's best news and in-depth reviews, straight to your inbox. Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors See all comments (15) Anton Shilov Contributing Writer Anton Shilov is a contributing writer at Tom’s Hardware. Over the past couple of decades, he has covered everything from CPUs and GPUs to supercomputers and from modern process technologies and latest fab tools to high-tech industry trends. Read more Big Tech News outlets are blocking Wayback Machine from archiving their pages Artificial Intelligence AWS outages caused by AI coding bot blunder, report claims Artificial Intelligence Report says ChatGPT 5.2 is sourcing data from AI-generated content Tech Industry Claimed 1,100% increase in AI-driven layoffs in 2025 might be misleading Artificial Intelligence More than half of CEOs report seeing no benefits from AI deployment so far Artificial Intelligence AI creates jobs, data from European Central Bank survey shows Latest in Artificial Intelligence Artificial Intelligence New Jersey datacenter expansion got $77m in tax breaks to create exactly one job Artificial Intelligence Analytics group signals possible delays at 40% of AI data center construction sites Artificial Intelligence Google and Pentagon in talks to run custom AI chips inside classified environments Artificial Intelligence Broadcom to supply Meta with custom silicon through 2029 Artificial Intelligence Elon Musk demonstrates first sample of Tesla AI5 processor, accidentally thanks TSC rather than TSMC Artificial Intelligence Nvidia releases Ising open AI model family for quantum computing tasks Latest in News MacOS Apple CEO Tim Cook steps down, company names Ternus as incoming CEO DDR5 New 'HUDIMM' test shows nearly 50% reduction in memory throughput with single subchannel DDR5 Artificial Intelligence New Jersey datacenter expansion got $77m in tax breaks to create exactly one job Cybersecurity AI cloud company Vercel breached after employee grants AI tool unrestricted access to Google Workspace Tech Industry Every SK hynix employee could receive $477,000 bonuses this year, almost $900,000 next year Linux Linux 7.1 update includes new in-kernel NTFS driver 15 Comments Comment from the forums USAFRet Admin said: Some AIs bypass robots.txt protocol Who didn't see that coming? Reply CmdrShepard USAFRet said: Who didn't see that coming? Yeah, when abiding to robots.txt is voluntary and when we know the techbro mentality of "it's easier to ask for forgiveness than to ask for permission" and how toothless the fines for doing stuff like this are there's nothing surprising about it. What I wonder is whether for the purpose of DMCA this ignoring of robots.txt would constitute a circumvention of protection of a computer system? That would be kind of creative reading of the law though, hope someone tests it in court. Reply Findecanor Ignoring "opt out" is now explicitly illegal within the European Union, according to the EU AI Act and the Common Digital Single Market directive. Although I find it unclear how violations would be classified and what possibilities for enforcement and repercussions there are. There is also a weakness in that the EU does not mandate or recommend any specific protocols. However, "robots.txt" is decades old and an official IETF standard, so there is no excuse for not following it. Reply MacZ24 Findecanor said: Ignoring "opt out" is now explicitly illegal within the European Union, according to the EU AI Act and the Common Digital Single Market directive. The EU doesn't have directives against building tech champions, but it is as if they do. Reply hotaru251 honestly until there are laws made to prevent using data w/o explicit permission w/ the punishment being a massive 50%+ of the companies earnings nobody's going to care to stop as "its just the cost of business" other wise. same reason companies can be caught breaking law over and over because the fines are capped out to such a low point they make more $ breaking law and paying the fines than following law. Reply Notton It's almost as if the same people behind crypto and nft money laundering are also behind these AI startups. Reply KnightShadey Reply 35below0 hotaru251 said: honestly until there are laws made to prevent using data w/o explicit permission w/ the punishment being a massive 50%+ of the companies earnings nobody's going to care to stop as "its just the cost of business" other wise. same reason companies can be caught breaking law over and over because the fines are capped out to such a low point they make more $ breaking law and paying the fines than following law. Even huge fines don't really stop the practise. Being fined millions or even an occassional bilion is still "cost of doing business". It's profitable so they keep doing it. Reply yahrightthere hotaru251 said: honestly until there are laws made to prevent using data w/o explicit permission w/ the punishment being a massive 50%+ of the companies earnings nobody's going to care to stop as "its just the cost of business" other wise. same reason companies can be caught breaking law over and over because the fines are capped out to such a low point they make more $ breaking law and paying the fines than following law. I 100% agree, also criminally prosecute owners, CEOs and officers of the offending companies. BTW shouldn't we all get recompense by companies that use our personal data and info! Make that a law and see how companies like the turn about. Reply hotaru251 35below0 said: It's profitable so they keep doing it. you didn't read my post fully. that was covered & also why i said it needs 50% of earnings (not just profit) as at such high costs it no longer becomes profitable. if it took half ur income & forced you to remove what you did illegally then they wont do it again as it becomes bad business (because you are losing more than you make from it) yahrightthere said: BTW shouldn't we all get recompense by companies that use our personal data and info! depends. is content your using free? then no as nothing is "free" and your data is the price you are paying. if you pay for soemthing? then yes as you are paying them thus your data shouldnt be free to harvest on top of that. Reply View All 15 Comments Show more comments