URL: https://www.newscientist.com/article/2422101-google-ai-learns-to-play-open-world-video-games-by-watching-them

Google AI learns to play open-world video games by watching them | New Scientist Close Advertisement Skip to content Sign in Search the website Subscribe now Subscribe now Subscribe now Technology Google AI learns to play open-world video games by watching them An artificial intelligence from Google DeepMind can play nine open-world video games like a human, by watching video from a screen and controlling a keyboard and mouse By Alex Wilkins 13 March 2024 Facebook / Meta Twitter / X icon Linkedin Reddit Email Some of the 3D virtual gaming environments that Google DeepMind’s SIMA AI has been mastering SIMA Team A Google DeepMind artificial intelligence model can play different open-world video games, such as No Man’s Sky , like a human just by watching video from a screen, which could be a step towards generally intelligent AIs that operate in the corporeal world. Playing video games has long been a means of testing the progress of AI systems, such as Google DeepMind’s AI mastery of virtual chess and Go , but these games have obvious ways to win or lose, making it relatively straightforward to train an AI to succeed at them. Advertisement Read more DeepMind AI solves hard geometry problems from mathematics olympiad Open-world games with more abstract objectives and extraneous information that can be ignored, such as Minecraft , are harder for AI systems to crack. Because the array of choices available in these games makes them a little more like normal life, they are thought to be an important stepping stone towards training AI agents that could do jobs in the real world – such as controlling robots – and artificial general intelligence. Now, researchers at Google DeepMind have developed an AI they call a Scalable Instructable Multiworld Agent , or SIMA, which can play nine different video games and virtual environments it hasn’t seen before using just the video feed from the game. This included the space-exploring No Man’s Sky , the problem-solving Teardown and the action-packed Goat Simulator 3 . Free newsletter Sign up to The Daily The latest on what’s new in science and why it matters each day. Sign up to newsletter “This is actually the interface that humans use to interact with a computer, it’s a very generic interface,” says Frederic Besse at DeepMind. Read more Eight sci-fi video games to look forward to in 2024 When asked in natural language, SIMA can perform about 600 tasks, of 10 seconds or less, that are common across the different games, such as moving around, using objects and navigating menus. It can also do more unique tasks like flying spaceships or mining for resources. Besse and his colleagues used pre-existing video and image recognition models to interpret game video data, then trained SIMA to map what happens in the video to certain tasks. To provide this information, the researchers got pairs of people to play video games together, with one person watching the screen and telling the other what moves to make, and also made people watch back their gameplay and describe the mouse and keyboard moves they performed for their game actions. This allowed SIMA to learn how people’s descriptions of moves related to the tasks themselves. When SIMA was trained on eight games, the researchers found it could then play a ninth game that it hadn’t seen before. However, it fell short of human-level performance. The researchers used a training method in which they rotated which eight games they trained the AI on so using the ninth game was the test, to ensure it can play any of the games it hasn’t seen before. Read more Google wants to solve tricky physics problems with quantum computers Extrapolating over different games is an important step towards a generalist AI agent, says Felipe Meneguzzi at the University of Aberdeen, UK, but SIMA can only currently perform a relatively limited set of short tasks that don’t require long-term planning. Performing a much wider range of complex tasks would be more difficult, he says. “It’s worth remembering that for companies like DeepMind, this research isn’t really about games, it’s about robotics,” says Michael Cook at King’s College London. “Navigating 3D environments is a means to an end, and these companies are keen to make AI systems that can perceive and act in the world. So I don’t see this having a large impact on video games, but it might have a lot of unknown impacts on our life outside in the real world.” Topics: artificial intelligence / video games / AI Advertisement Sign up to our weekly newsletter Receive a weekly dose of discovery in your inbox. We'll also keep you up to date with New Scientist events and special offers. Sign up More from New Scientist Explore the latest news, articles and features Technology Do you need to worry about Mythos, Anthropic's computer-hacking AI? News Technology Table tennis-playing robot on track to becoming world champion News Technology We might finally know how to use quantum computers to boost AI News Technology New Scientist recommends Jamie Bartlett's insightful How to Talk to AI Culture Popular articles Trending New Scientist articles 1 100-year-old assumption about the universe may soon be overturned 2 Why the keto diet could be a revolutionary way to treat mental illness 3 The bombshell results that demand a new theory of the universe 4 Largest-ever octopus was great white shark of invertebrate predators 5 10,000 new planets found hidden in NASA telescope data 6 We’ve glimpsed before the big bang and it’s not what we expected 7 How your heart rate variability can offer an insight into your mind 8 Coral reefs on a remote archipelago shrugged off a massive heatwave 9 Why your opinion of used electric vehicles is probably wrong 10 The daring idea that time is an illusion and how we could prove it Advertisement Close Close