URL: https://www.foxnews.com/tech/father-ai-jurgen-schmidhuber-says-tech-fears-misplaced-cannot-stop

‘Father of AI’ says tech fears misplaced: ‘You cannot stop it’ | Fox News Fox News Expand / Collapse search Log In Watch TV Menu Games Expand/Collapse Menu Scattergories Daily 5 Across the Letter Word Game DownWords Sudoku Swap Words Word Search Icon Match Daily Crossword Puzzle Mini Crossword Puzzle Deals Expand/Collapse Menu Trending Deals Gift Guides Home Deals Kitchen Deals Tech and Electronic Deals Health and Fitness Deals Beauty and Fashion Deals FOX Business Expand/Collapse Menu Economy Personal Finance Markets Watchlist Lifestyle Real Estate Tech Science & Tech Expand/Collapse Menu Air & Space Security Innovation Video Games Military Tech Planet Earth Wild Nature Watch Live Expand/Collapse Menu FOX News Shows Programming Schedule On Air Personalities Full Episodes Show Clips News Clips Apps & Products Expand/Collapse Menu FOX News Go FOX Weather FOX Nation FOX Noticias FOX News Shop FOX News Radio FOX News Newsletters FOX News Podcasts FOX One Games Expand/Collapse Menu Scattergories Daily 5 Across the Letter Word Game DownWords Sudoku Swap Words Word Search Icon Match Daily Crossword Puzzle Mini Crossword Puzzle Deals Expand/Collapse Menu Trending Deals Gift Guides Home Deals Kitchen Deals Tech and Electronic Deals Health and Fitness Deals Beauty and Fashion Deals FOX Business Expand/Collapse Menu Economy Personal Finance Markets Watchlist Lifestyle Real Estate Tech Science & Tech Expand/Collapse Menu Air & Space Security Innovation Video Games Military Tech Planet Earth Wild Nature Watch Live Expand/Collapse Menu FOX News Shows Programming Schedule On Air Personalities Full Episodes Show Clips News Clips Apps & Products Expand/Collapse Menu FOX News Go FOX Weather FOX Nation FOX Noticias FOX News Shop FOX News Radio FOX News Newsletters FOX News Podcasts FOX One Facebook Twitter Instagram RSS Newsletters Fox News Terms of Use Privacy Policy Your Privacy Choices Closed Caption Policy Help Contact Us Accessibility Statement News Sitemap Video Sitemap This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. ©2026 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. Quotes displayed in real-time or delayed by at least 15 minutes. Market data provided by Factset . Powered and implemented by FactSet Digital Solutions . Legal Statement . Mutual Fund and ETF data provided by LSEG . Recommended Videos Recommended Articles Left Arrow Fox News AI Newsletter: Your next Dairy Queen order could be taken by AI FCC router rule raises questions about future updates Amazon just put Elon Musk's Starlink on notice How Florida retiree lost $200K in fake PayPal refund scam Toyota's CUE7 robot shoots hoops using AI Booking.com data breach exposes traveler data to scams Robots beat humans in half marathon Michael and Susan Dell surpass $1 billion in donations backing AI-driven hospital project Fake Windows update installs hidden malware Alexa+ lets you order food like a real conversation 6 crypto scam scripts criminals use to steal your money BMW puts humanoid robots to work building EVs iPhone and Samsung flashlight tricks you should know You don’t need an SSN to open a credit card: Scammers know that Chinese robot breaks human world record in Beijing half-marathon The one thing scammers check before targeting you online Mexico’s climate supercomputer could change forecasting How scammers target grieving victims through online games Fox News AI Newsletter: Tech company cuts 1,000 jobs in AI-driven restructuring Is Mark Zuckerberg's Meta AI getting too smart? Right Arrow Left Arrow Watters' Cooler: America got catfished US has to ‘get creative’ in combat in Iranian waters: Joey Jones Justice Department takes action against overseas scam centers targeting Americans Fake MAGA influencer exposed as AI persona Michael Easter and Gary Brecka discuss the 'choice' to live to be 100 US military launches FIRST autonomous warfare command Scammers swipe $200K from man in PayPal refund scheme ChatGPT probed for possibly aiding campus shooting suspect Vivek Ramaswamy joins Lawrence Jones for breakfast amid Ohio governorship bid TPUSA draws massive crowd at Ohio State, discusses economic opportunity Greg Gutfeld: This is all some kind of ploy to eavesdrop Two CIA members dead in Mexico after narco operation, new report says Hot air balloon makes EMERGENCY backyard landing WATCH: US Marines rappel from chopper to SEIZE Iranian ship FBI, White House review cases of missing, dead US scientists DOT pulls $73 million from New York over CDL driver vetting Kash Patel to sue The Atlantic over allegedly defamatory story JUST IN: Patel announces he will sue The Atlantic over scathing allegations Why President Trump is reading a passage of 2 Chronicles from the Oval Office New Chips Are Maximizing Battery Power Right Arrow Artificial Intelligence ‘Father of AI’ says tech fears misplaced: ‘You cannot stop it’ Some tech leaders have publicly criticized AI as posing threat to humanity By Emma Colton Fox News Published May 7, 2023 5:52pm EDT Facebook Twitter Threads Flipboard Comments Print Email Add Fox News on Google close Video Does artificial intelligence pose threat to humanity? Fox News correspondent Grady Trimble has the latest on fears the technology will spiral out of control on "Special Report." NEW You can now listen to Fox News articles! A German computer scientist known as the "father of AI" said fears over the technology are misplaced and there is no stopping artificial intelligence's progress. "You cannot stop it," Jürgen Schmidhuber said of artificial intelligence and the current international race to build more powerful systems, according to The Guardian. "Surely not on an international level because one country might may have really different goals from another country. So, of course, they are not going to participate in some sort of moratorium." Schmidhuber worked on artificial neural networks in the 1990s, with his research later spawning language-processing models for technologies such as Google Translate, The Guardian reported. He currently serves as the director of the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology’s AI initiative in Saudi Arabia, and he states in his bio that he has been working on building "a self-improving Artificial Intelligence (AI) smarter than himself" since he was roughly 15 years old. AI COULD GO 'TERMINATOR,' GAIN UPPER HAND OVER HUMANS IN DARWINIAN RULES OF EVOLUTION, REPORT WARNS Jürgen Schmidhuber (Getty Images) Schmidhuber said that he doesn’t believe anyone should try to halt progress on developing powerful artificial intelligence systems, arguing that "in 95% of all cases, AI research is really about our old motto, which is make human lives longer and healthier and easier." Schmidhuber also said that concerns over AI are misplaced and that developing AI-powered tools for good purposes will counter bad actors using the technology . FUTURE OF AI: NEW TECH WILL CREATE ‘DIGITAL HUMANS,’ COULD USE MORE ENERGY THAN ALL WORKING PEOPLE BY 2025 "It’s just that the same tools that are now being used to improve lives can be used by bad actors, but they can also be used against the bad actors," he said, according to The Guardian. Schmidhuber said concerns over AI are misplaced and that developing AI-powered tools for good purposes will counter bad actors using the technology. (Bloomberg via Getty Images) "And I would be much more worried about the old dangers of nuclear bombs than about the new little dangers of AI that we see now." TECH CEO WARNS AI RISKS 'HUMAN EXTINCTION' AS EXPERTS RALLY BEHIND SIX-MONTH PAUSE His comments come as other tech leaders and experts have sounded the alarm that the powerful technology poses risks to humanity. Tesla founder Elon Musk and Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak joined thousands of other tech experts in signing a letter in March calling for AI labs to pause their research until safety measures are put in place. Artificial intelligence pioneer Geoffrey Hinton speaks at the Thomson Reuters Financial and Risk Summit in Toronto on Dec. 4, 2017. (Reuters/Mark Blinch/File) ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 'GODFATHER' ON AI POSSIBLY WIPING OUT HUMANITY: ‘IT'S NOT INCONCEIVABLE’ Geoffrey Hinton, known as the "godfather of AI," announced this month that he quit his job at Google to speak out on his tech fears. On Friday, Hinton said AI could pose "more urgent" risks to humanity than climate change – but even though he shares similar concerns to tech leaders such as Musk, he said pausing AI research at labs is "utterly unrealistic." "I'm in the camp that thinks this is an existential risk, and it’s close enough that we ought to be working very hard right now and putting a lot of resources into figuring out what we can do about it," he told Reuters. Schmidhuber, who has openly criticized Hinton for allegedly failing to cite fellow researchers in his studies, told The Guardian that AI will exceed human intelligence and ultimately benefit people as they use the AI systems, which follows comments he’s made in the past. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP "I’ve been working on [AI] for several decades, since the '80s basically, and I still believe it will be possible to witness that AIs are going to be much smarter than myself, such that I can retire," Schmidhuber said in 2018. Get a daily look at what’s developing in science and technology throughout the world. Arrives Weekly Subscribe Subscribed Subscribe You've successfully subscribed to this newsletter! Continue