URL: https://www.cnx-software.com/2020/01/16/snekboard-controls-lego-power-functions-with-circuitpython-or-snek-programming-languages/

Snekboard Controls LEGO Power Functions with CircuitPython or Snek Programming Languages (Crowdfunding) - CNX Software Skip to content CNX Software – Embedded Systems News Reviews, tutorials and the latest news about embedded systems, IoT, open-source hardware, SBC's, microcontrollers, processors, and more Posted on January 16, 2020 February 22, 2021 by Jean-Luc Aufranc (CNXSoft) - 4 Comments on Snekboard Controls LEGO Power Functions with CircuitPython or Snek Programming Languages (Crowdfunding) Snekboard Controls LEGO Power Functions with CircuitPython or Snek Programming Languages (Crowdfunding) LEGO has provided robotics kit for years , and LEGO blocks and accessories in general are great to build all sort of projects, so it’s not surprising third-parties have come up with LEGO-compatible boards and accessories for makers which include DFRobot BOSON kits , STEMTera smart breadboard, Brixo LEGO blocks with built-in electronics, and more. Snekboard is another option with the Microchip SAMD21 board designed to work with LEGO Power Functions motors and switches are programmable with MicroPyhon based CircuitPython or Snek programming languages. Snekboard hardware specifications: Microcontroller – Microchip SAMD21G18A Arm Cortex-M0 MCU with 256 KB flash and 32 KB RAM. Storage – 2MB SPI flash USB – 1x Micro USB port for power and programming Motor Control – 4x TI DRV8800 DC motor drivers tp provide up to 2.8A for LEGO motors and servos I/O- 8x GPIOs (3.3V) Misc – 2x RGB LEDs, 1x blue LED Power Supply 5V via USB port Single-cell LiPo battery support with USB charging and 9V boost regulator Snekboard is open source hardware with (PDF) design files already available and released under the TARP license . As we can see from the comparison table above, there are other motor control boards for LEGO motors, including LEGO’s own Move Hub , but Snekboard is the only one from this list to support up to 4 motors, and the developer – Keith Packard – attempted to provide a good mix of features. It’s the first time, I hear about Snek programming language, and like CircuitPython, it is a fork of MicroPython, but Snek is supposed to be even simpler to use and has a lower footprint. The project has just launched on Crowd Supply with a $4,000 funding target. The board is offered with a 3.7 V, 900 mAh LiPo battery for $79, and other rewards include a $10 LEGO baseplate, and a $20 cable set. Shipping is free to the US and adds $6 to $7 to the rest of the world. Backers should expect their reward(s) to ship in May 2020. Jean-Luc Aufranc (CNXSoft) Jean-Luc started CNX Software in 2010 as a part-time endeavor, before quitting his job as a software engineering manager, and starting to write daily news, and reviews full time later in 2011. Share this: Support CNX Software! Donate via cryptocurrencies , become a Patron on Patreon, or purchase goods on Amazon or Aliexpress . We also use affiliate links in articles to earn commissions if you make a purchase after clicking on those links. Subscribe Login Notify of new follow-up comments new replies to my comments Connect with: Label {} [+] Name* Email* Website I agree to the Privacy Policy The comment form collects your name, email and content to allow us keep track of the comments placed on the website. Please read and accept our website Terms and Privacy Policy to post a comment. Connect with: Label {} [+] Name* Email* Website I agree to the Privacy Policy The comment form collects your name, email and content to allow us keep track of the comments placed on the website. Please read and accept our website Terms and Privacy Policy to post a comment. 4 Comments oldest newest Load More Comments Search for: Search Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Telegram YouTube RSS Trending Posts - Last 7 Days LightInk – An ESP32-based, solar-powered E-ink smartwatch with up to 10 months of battery life 11.5k views | 10 comments LeafKVM open-source hardware IP KVM offers WiFi 5, PoE, USB-C serial console, and 2.4-inch touchscreen display (Crowdfunding) 5.9k views | 6 comments UGV Beast – An off-road tracked AI robot built for Raspberry Pi 4/5 5.8k views | 0 comments LILYGO T-Watch Ultra – An IP65-rated ESP32-S3 smartwatch with 2.01-inch AMOLED, LoRa, and GNSS 5.5k views | 0 comments Beelink EX Mate Pro – A multi-function USB4 v2 80 Gbps dock with 2.5GbE, M.2 sockets, 140W charger, voice communication system, and more 4.9k views | 9 comments SPONSORS Recent Comments Subscribe to Comments RSS Feed Latest Reviews This website uses cookies to improve your experience. We'll assume you're ok with this, but if you don't like these, you can remove them Accept Privacy & Cookies Policy Close Privacy Overview This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these, the cookies that are categorized as necessary are stored on your browser as they are essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. We also use third-party cookies that help us analyze and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may affect your browsing experience. Necessary Necessary Always Enabled Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information. Non-necessary Non-necessary Any cookies that may not be particularly necessary for the website to function and is used specifically to collect user personal data via analytics, ads, other embedded contents are termed as non-necessary cookies. It is mandatory to procure user consent prior to running these cookies on your website. SAVE & ACCEPT wpDiscuz Insert