URL: https://www.cnn.com/2019/04/11/tech/amazon-alexa-listening/index.html

Amazon reportedly employs thousands of people to listen to your Alexa conversations | CNN Business CNN values your feedback 1. How relevant is this ad to you? 2. Did you encounter any technical issues? Video player was slow to load content Video content never loaded Ad froze or did not finish loading Video content did not start after ad Audio on ad was too loud Other issues Ad never loaded Ad prevented/slowed the page from loading Content moved around while ad loaded Ad was repetitive to ads I've seen previously Other issues Cancel Submit Thank You! Your effort and contribution in providing this feedback is much appreciated. Close Ad Feedback Markets DOW S&P 500 NASDAQ Hot Stocks Fear & Greed Index ----- is driving the US market Latest Market News Americans’ taxes by the numbers Adidas shares get a lift from London Marathon winners China blocks Meta’s acquisition of Chinese-founded AI startup Manus Hot Stocks ----- is driving the US market Something isn't loading properly. Please check back later. Ad Feedback Amazon reportedly employs thousands of people to listen to your Alexa conversations By Jordan Valinsky , CNN Business 2 min read Updated 2:38 PM EDT, Thu April 11, 2019 Link Copied! Video Ad Feedback Is an Amazon employee listening to you? 01:50 • Source: CNN Amazon 16 videos Video Ad Feedback Is an Amazon employee listening to you? 01:50 Now playing • Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Amazon introduces new warehouse robot, says it's not replacing human workers 01:06 Now playing • Source: CNN Business Video Ad Feedback Amazon responds to inflation with surcharges 01:29 Now playing • Source: CNNBusiness Video Ad Feedback Amazon workers celebrate first labor union 01:04 Now playing • Source: CNNBusiness Video Ad Feedback Nerdy, geek: Friends describe Jeff Bezos in his 20s 01:07 Now playing • Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback 'They're letting the fox into the hen house': How Bezos sold books to start his empire 01:19 Now playing • Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Amazon is jumping into the in-store shopping apparel game 01:01 Now playing • Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Amazon is shutting down Alexa.com. In 2000, CNN reported on the company's privacy concerns 03:45 Now playing • Source: CNN Business Video Ad Feedback Hear why Amazon is opening a free cloud training center 03:15 Now playing • Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Low wages & high quotas: Hear why this Alabama woman took on Amazon 04:57 Now playing • Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Amazon package delivery goes hilariously wrong 02:02 Now playing • Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Amazon built a robot for your home. And it can beatbox. 01:39 Now playing • Source: CNN Business Video Ad Feedback Amazon truck's move to avoid traffic goes viral 02:19 Now playing • Source: CNN Video Ad Feedback Amazon's new CEO faces antitrust and worker pressure 03:24 Now playing • Source: CNNBusiness Video Ad Feedback This is what it's like to work in an Amazon warehouse 03:41 Now playing • Source: CNN Business Video Ad Feedback Amazon changes marijuana and time off policies 02:19 Now playing • Source: CNNBusiness See more videos New York CNN Business — Not only is Alexa listening when you speak to an Echo smart speaker, an Amazon employee is potentially listening, too. Amazon (AMZN) employs a global team that transcribes the voice commands captured after the wake word is detected and feeds them back into the software to help improve Alexa’s grasp of human speech so it can respond more efficiently in the future, Bloomberg reports . Amazon reportedly employs thousands of full-time workers and contractors in several countries, including the United States, Costa Rica and Romania, to listen to as many as 1,000 audio clips in shifts that last up to nine hours. The audio clips they listen to were described as “mundane” and even sometimes “possibly criminal,” including listening to a potential sexual assault. In a response to the story, Amazon confirmed to CNN Business that it hires people to listen to what customers say to Alexa. But Amazon said it takes “security and privacy of our customers’ personal information seriously.” The company said it only annotates an “extremely small number of interactions from a random set of customers.” The report said Amazon doesn’t “explicitly” tell Alexa users that it employs people to listen to the recordings. Amazon said in its frequently asked question section that it uses “requests to Alexa to train our speech recognition and natural language understanding systems.” People can opt out of Amazon using their voice recordings to improve the software in the privacy settings section of the Alexa app. Bloomberg said that Alexa auditors don’t have access to the customers’ full name or address, but do have the device’s serial number and the Amazon account number associated with the device. “Employees do not have direct access to information that can identify the person or account as part of this workflow,” an Amazon spokesperson told CNN Business. “While all information is treated with high confidentiality and we use multi-factor authentication to restrict access, service encryption, and audits of our control environment to protect it, customers can always delete their utterances at any time.” An Amazon spokesperson clarified that no audio is stored unless the Alexa-enabled device is activated by a wake word. “By default, Echo devices are designed to detect only your chosen wake word,” a company spokesperson said. “The device detects the wake word by identifying acoustic patterns that match the wake word.” Amazon previously has been embroiled in controversy for privacy concerns regarding Alexa. Last year, an Echo user said the smart speaker had recorded a conversation without them knowing and sent the audio file to an Amazon employee in Seattle. Amazon confirmed the error and said the device’s always-listening microphones misheard a series of words and mistakenly sent a voice message. Related Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback CNN Business Videos CNN Video Will China’s self-driving cars dominate the roads? 1:49 Apr 25, 2026 MS Video US special forces soldier arrested after allegedly winning $400,000 on Maduro raid 0:40 Apr 23, 2026 Getty Images Video Warner Bros. Discovery shareholders approve Paramount takeover 2:36 Apr 23, 2026 Brendan McDermid/Reuters Video The highs and lows of Spotify’s first 20 years 1:29 Apr 23, 2026 Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Download the CNN app Scan the QR code to download the CNN app on Google Play. Download the CNN app Scan the QR code to download the CNN app from the Apple Store.