URL: https://www.ingentaconnect.com/contentone/imp/jcs/1995/00000002/00000003/653

Facing up to the problem of consciousness: Ingenta Connect Skip to main content Home / Journal of Consciousness Studies , Volume 2, Number 3 Facing up to the problem of consciousness Buy Article: $23.57 + tax ( Refund Policy ) Pressing the buy now button more than once may result in multiple purchases Author: Chalmers, D.J. Source: Journal of Consciousness Studies , Volume 2, Number 3, 1 March 1995, pp. 200-219(20) Publisher: Imprint Academic view table of contents | next article > Abstract References Citations Supplementary Data Suggestions To make progress on the problem of consciousness, we have to confront it directly. In this paper, I first isolate the truly hard part of the problem, separating it from more tractable parts and giving an account of why it is so difficult to explain. I critique some recent work that uses reductive methods to address consciousness, and argue that these methods inevitably fail to come to grips with the hardest part of the problem. Once this failure is recognized, the door to further progress is opened. In the second half of the paper, I argue that if we move to a new kind of nonreductive explanation, a naturalistic account of consciousness can be given. I put forward my own candidate for such an account: a nonreductive theory based on principles of structural coherence and organizational invariance and a double-aspect view of information. No References No Citations No Supplementary Data No Article Media No Metrics Keywords: Consciousness ; dualism ; experience ; explanation ; functionalism ; hard problem ; information ; materialism ; qualia ; reduction Document Type: Research Article Affiliations: Department of Philosophy, University of California Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA. Publication date: 01 March 1995 Close Signup Dialog Sign-in Register Username: Password: Remember Login Login reminder OpenAthens Shibboleth Tools Activate personal subscription Reference exports + - EndNote BibT E X Linking options + - Ingenta Connect OpenURL Receive new issue alert Latest TOC RSS Feed Recent Issues RSS Feed © Get Permissions Favourites Accessibility Share Content Access Key Free content Partial Free content New content Open access content Partial Open access content Subscribed content Partial Subscribed content Free trial content Cookie Policy X Cookie Policy Ingenta Connect website makes use of cookies so as to keep track of data that you have filled in. I am Happy with this Find out more